Returning to the Imperial kitchens from his duties with Kang Xi in the Upper Library, Trinket did not have long to wait for Butcher Qian's arrival. This time the butcher had four assistants with him, carrying between them the neatly butchered, immaculately clean carcasses of two large, fat pigs, each, at a rough estimate, representing not less than three hundred catties of pork. 'Laurie Goong-goong,' he told Trinket, 'to get the most value out of this China-root pork, you want to eat some each day, as soon as you get up in the morning. It's best if you cut only as much as you need at one time and roast it straight away.
I'll have one of these pigs carried to your quarters now. You'll be able to cut some off yourself and roast it first thing tomorrow. What you can't eat yourself you can get the folk in the kitchen here to make salt pork of.'
Realizing that there must be some hidden purpose behind all this, Trinket thanked him for the advice and offered to show him the way, whereupon Butcher Qian, leaving one of the carcasses and its two bearers in the kitchen, accompanied him to his room, followed by the other two assistants carrying the second pig.
The Manager's quarters in the Imperial Catering Department were not very far from the Imperial kitchens. As soon as they were inside, Trinket ordered a young eunuch to take the two assistants back to the kitchens, with instructions that they were to wait for their master there with the other two, and closed the door after them.
'Master,' said Butcher Qian, speaking in a low voice, 'is there anyone else in this apartment?'
Seeing Trinket shake his head, he crouched down over the pig's carcass and gently turned it on its back again so that its legs were pointing upwards. It was now possible to see that the slit-open underbelly of the animal had been drawn together and was being held in place by strips of pig-skin sewn across the slit.
It was obvious that something very out of the ordinary must be concealed inside. Trinket could feel his heart thumping as he reflected that this might well be weapons which the Triads were smuggling in to be used in a killing spree inside the Palace.
He watched as Butcher Qian tore off the strips, opened out the carcass, and very gently lifted a large object out in his cradled arms.
'Coo!' he gasped. It was a human body.
Butcher Qian laid the body on the floor.
It was small and slight with an abundance of hair. To his astonishment Trinket found himself looking down at a thirteen- or fourteen-year-old girl. She was dressed in the flimsiest of summer garments, her eyes were tightly closed, and her body was completely motionless except for the gentle rise and fall of her breathing.
'Who is this girl?' he asked softly.
'Why have you brought her here?'
'She's the Little Countess,' said Butcher Qian. The Mu Family's Little Countess.'
Trinket's eyes grew round with astonishment. 'The Mu Family's Little Countess?'
'Young Lord Mu's little sister,' said Butcher Qian.
The Mus have kidnapped our Brother Xu, so we've grabbed her as a hostage, just to make sure they don't do Brother Xu any harm.'
'Brilliant!' said Trinket, his surprise now mixed with pleasure.
'But how did you get hold of her?'
'Yesterday, after we found that Brother Xu had disappeared,' said Butcher Qian, 'while you and the others went back to Willow Lane, I went off on my own to make a few enquiries. First of all I wanted to find out whether the Mu Family had any other places in the city besides the Willow Lane one where they might be holding him; and secondly I wanted to know how many more of them there are, so that we have some idea what we are up against if it comes to a fight-out.
Well—huh!—I can tell you the answer to the second question straight away. A lot. The young Lord Mu himself has come to the Capital and he's brought some of their best fighting-men with him.'
Trinket frowned. 'Tamardy!
How many Triads have we got altogether in the Green Wood Lodge?
Enough to fight them ten to one?'
'No need for you to worry, Master,' said Butcher Qian.
The reason the Mu Family is here now is not because they want to fight us Triads.
It's because the traitor Wu Sangui's son, Wu Yingxiong, is in town.'
Trinket nodded. 'They've come to assassinate the Little Traitor, you mean?'
'Right first time, Master, ' said the butcher.
'I always said you were a smart one.
As long as the Old Traitor and the Little Traitor are in Yunnan, they can't touch them; but as soon as one of them leaves Yunnan, it gives them an opportunity.
The only thing is, the Little Traitor is taking no chances with his security: he's brought a whole lot of first-rate fighting-men to protect him, so they won't find it an easy job to kill him.
I found out that those Mu folk do have another place in the city, but when I went to have a look there, the menfolk all seemed to have gone out, and there wasn't any sign of Brother Xu there either. The only people I found there were this girl and a couple of maids looking after her. It seemed too good a chance to miss, so—'
'So you went to catch a sheep, but while you were about it you thought you might as well take a pig,' said Trinket, slightly reconstructing the proverb.
Butcher Qian laughed. 'That's about it.
Although she's only a young girl, she means all the world to the Mu folk. As long as their Little Countess is in our hands, Brother Xu will be safe as houses. There's absolutely no fear of their not looking after him properly.'
'Brother Qian,' said Trinket admiringly, 'this is a major achievement.'
'Oh, I don't know about that,' said Butcher Qian coyly. 'Anyway, thank you, Master.'
'So now we've got this Little Countess,' said Trinket, 'what are we going to do with her?'
While they were talking, he had been stealing glances at the recumbent figure on the floor. She was very beautiful—though he phrased it to himself mentally in the debased language of the brothel.
'It's a tricky business, this,' said Butcher Qian. 'I was thinking it was one for the Master himself to decide.'
'What do you think we ought to do?' Trinket asked presently, as if he had been mulling the matter over in his mind.
He hadn't been with the Triads very long, but long enough by now to know the drill.
It was all 'Master this' and 'Master that' and respectfully waiting to be told by the Master what they should do; but invariably they had already decided what they wanted to do and only wanted the Master's approval for doing it, so that if there was any question about it later, the Master would have sole responsibility for what they had done.
And so his invariable response to the invariable question was to turn it back on them: 'What do you think we ought to do?'
'Well, for the present,' said Butcher Qian, 'we've got to hide her somewhere safe and somewhere where the Mu people can't find her.
There are a lot of them around in the Capital right now, and though it's to assassinate the Little Traitor that they're here, now that we've killed one of their people and they've kidnapped Brother Xu, you can be sure they're keeping a close watch on anywhere in the city where there are Triads.
From now on we shan't be able to take a piss or a shit without their knowing about it.'
Trinket laughed. Here at last was someone who spoke his language. 'Sit down, Brother Qian,' he said. 'Let's take our time over this.'
'Thank you, Master,' said Butcher Qian, seating himself in one of the chairs and continuing. 'There were really two reasons why I hid the Little Countessinside this pig's carcass. One was to get her past the Palace Guard: they always search everyone at the gate. But it was also to get her past any of the Mu Family spies who might be out watching for us.
There are some really dangerous people among that Mu lot, you can't afford to take any chances.
If she's hidden anywhere other than in the Palace, there's no guaranteeing they wouldn't try to get her back.'
'So you're proposing to hide her in the Palace?' said Trinket.
'Well, that's not really for me to say,' said the butcher. 'It's entirely up to you, Master.
Mind you, look anywhere you like, you'll never find a safer place than this.
However many of their ace fighters the Mu Family may have got in the city, they're not going to take on the Palace Guard.
Not that they'd ever guess she was in the Palace, anyway. But even suppose—it's very unlikely, but just suppose—they did find out she was here, they'd never try getting in here to rescue her.
If they could get in to do that, they could just as well get in to carry off the Tartar Emperor, and they've never tried to do that yet because they know it's out of the question.
Of course, it was rather a nerve, taking it on myself to bring the Little Countess in here without consulting you. It means a lot of danger for you, Master. And trouble. I deserve to be hung.'
'You say yourself that you deserve to be hung,' thought Trinket, 'but you know damn well that you won't be.
Still, it does seem the best plan to hide her in here. As he says, it's the one place they will never think of looking; and they'd never be able to get her out of here, even if they did.
Well, Mister Butcher Qian, if you had the nerve to kidnap her and smuggle her into the Palace, I suppose I ought to have the nerve to keep her here.'
He gave the man a smile. 'It's a very good idea,' he said. 'We'll hide her here then.'
'If you think it's all right, I'm sure it will be,' said Butcher Qian.
'There's this to be said too, for hiding her here. When this business is over and the Little Countess is back with her own people again, it won't be any disgrace to her if they know that she's been kept all the time in the Palace; whereas if I were to keep her in the basement of my slaughterhouse—well, what with the stink of blood and offal round her all the time, it wouldn't be very nice for a person of her quality.'
'Unless you fed her on China-root and gave her Shaoxing wine to drink,' said Trinket mischievously.
Butcher Qian laughed at the interruption before continuing: 'Besides, although the Little Countess is only a girl, being a member of the fair sex it wouldn't do much for her good name if she was kept with a lot of rough men; whereas being kept with you, Master, it won't matter.'
'Why's that?' said Trinket in some surprise.
'Well,' said Butcher Qian, 'you're young too, and besides . . . besides . . . you work in the Palace, so of course ... I mean . . . it's all right.'
The butcher was clearly embarrassed, and Trinket had to think for some moments before he saw why. 'Oh, I see. You mean because I'm a eunuch. If I'm the one guarding her, it won't do any harm to her reputation.
But I'm only a pretend eunuch, you know.'
It was because he wasn't a real eunuch that he hadn't grasped sooner what the embarrassed butcher was getting at.
'Is your bedroom in there, Master?' asked the butcher.
Trinket nodded.
Butcher Qian took up the Little Countess in his arms, carried her into the bedroom, and laid her down on the bed.
There was just the one large bed there. Previously there had been a smaller one as well in which Trinket used to sleep, but after the death of Old Hai, he had had it moved out.
He had too many secrets to want a young eunuch attendant living with him in his apartment.
'Before I brought her in, I closed the Holy Hall and Yang Cord points on her back and the Pillar of Heaven one on her neck so that she couldn't move or speak,' said the butcher.
'If you want her to eat anything, you'll have to open them up again; but before you do that, I'd advise you to first close the Ring Jump points on her legs so that she can't run away.
The Mu people are all very skilled in the Martial Arts, and though a young girl like this isn't likely to know much about that sort of thing, it isn't worth taking any chances.'
Trinket wanted to ask him where the Holy Hall and Ring Jump vital points were and how you closed and opened them; but then he remembered that, as Master of the Green Wood Lodge and a disciple of the great Helmsman, he was probably expected to know about these things and felt sure his subordinates would despise him if they found out that he was totally ignorant of these matters; so he just nodded and said that he would. 'Anyway, ' he thought, 'I shouldn't have any difficulty in handling her. She's only a girl.'
'Could you lend me a knife, Master?' said Butcher Qian.
Trinket wondered nervously what he wanted it for, but stooped down nevertheless and extracted the dagger from inside his boot.
Butcher Qian took it from him and made an incision in the back of the pig's carcass. Unaware of the blade's incomparable sharpness, he was somewhat surprised at the ease with which it sank in, at once burying itself up to the hilt and slicing through fat and flesh as if it were bean curd.
'This is a good weapon you've got here,' he said admiringly.
In no time at all he had cut off the two forelegs and two large collops from the back. ''You can keep these to roast and eat yourself, Master, ' he said. The rest you can give to the little Goong-goongs to carry back to the kitchens.
I'll take my leave now. If there's any business in the Society to report, I'll let you know straight away, '
'Right, ' said Trinket.
He glanced towards the Little Countess lying on the bed: 'This girl—she's sleeping very soundly.'
He'd wanted to say, 'This girl better not stay here long. It's terribly dangerous having her here. If anyone were to find out, I'd really be in the shit, '
But then he reflected that all members of the Triad Society were heroes who laughed at danger and would despise him if they heard him uttering such craven words.
As soon as Butcher Qian had gone back to the kitchens, Trinket barred the door and checked the window to make sure there were no chinks or slits in the paper through which anyone could peep into the room, then, sitting on the edge of the bed, he inspected the Little Countess. She was staring fixedly at the top of the bedstead, and when she saw Trinket approach, she closed her eyes fast.
He laughed. 'You can't talk and you can't move! All you can do is just lie there like a good little girl!'
Her dress was still clean, and Trinket reflected that Butcher Qian must have done a good job of cleaning out the inside of the carcass. He threw a coverlet over her.
From the snowy pallor of her cheeks, drained of all their colour, and the fluttering of her long eyelashes, he could tell that she was very frightened. 'Don't be afraid,' he said. 'I'm not going to kill you.
Just wait a few days and I'll be setting you free again.'
The Little Countess opened her eyes wide, looked at him for a moment, and then quickly closed them again.
Trinket thought of the great awe in which the Mu Family were held by all the Brotherhood of River and Lake; of their stuck-up henchman the elder Bo—now dead, fortunately, struck down by one of his Triads—and his younger brother who had raged at him and nearly broken his wrist. (The bruise was still there, he saw on inspecting it, and only slightly fainter.)
'And now their Little Countess is in my hands,' he thought. 'I can beat her and curse her as much as I want to, and she won't be able to move a muscle.'
The thought was so gratifying that it made him laugh out loud, causing the Little Countess to open her eyes to see what he was laughing at.
'Call yourself a countess, do you?' said Trinket. 'I suppose you think you're very superior.
Well, to me you're nobody.'
He grasped her right ear and gave it a few pulls, then he pinched her nose between finger and thumb and twisted it a couple of times, laughing as he did so.
The Little Countess had shut her eyes again, but two fat tears escaped from under their lids and coursed down her cheeks.
'Don't cry!' Trinket shouted at her.
'I forbid you to cry.'
But the Little Countess's tears ran even faster.
'Hot-piece momma!' said Trinket exasperatedly. 'Being stubborn, are we? Open your eyes and look at me, you smelly little tart!'
But the Little Countess closed her eyes even tighter.
'Huh! Think you're on your Mu Family estate still, do you?' said Trinket. Think you've got your tamardy Paladins to look after you? Grandmother's! What's so tamardy wonderful about them? I tell you this: if they ever come my way, I'll chop them into little bits, each one of them.'
'Open your eyes!' he hollered at the top of his voice.
But all the Little Countess's strength seemed to go into closing them tighter.
'All right,' he said. 'If you won't open your lousy eyes, you won't be needing them any more.
I might as well cut them out. They'll make a nice little snack for me next time I'm having a drink.'
He took out his dagger and slid the flat of the blade a couple of times over her eyelids.
A shudder ran through her whole body, but she still would not open her eyes.
Trinket was at his wit's end to know what to do with her. 'You don't want to open your eyes but I want you to open them,' he said. 'All right, we'll play a little game and see who comes out best, the high and mighty Little Countess or the nasty little beggar-boy.
For the time being I'm not going to cut your eyes out.
I'll cut a little turtle on your left cheek and a cow-pat on the right one.
Then, when the cuts have scarred over and you go out into the street, people will come crowding round in thousands to gaze at the sight. "Oh, look!" they'll say. "How beautiful! The beautiful Mu Countess with a turtle on one cheek and a cow-pat on the other!"
Now will you open your eyes?'
The poor Little Countess, mistress of herself only in the ability to open or close her eyes, now closed them even tighter.
'I see,' said Trinket, pretending to be talking to himself. The little tart knows she's not good-looking. She's decided she wants a bit of decoration on her face to improve her looks. All right, then. I'll carve the turtle first.'
He took the lid off an inkstone that was on the table, ground some ink in it, and dabbled the tip of a writing-brush in it until it was well soaked.
The brush, the inkstone, and the ink-stick had all been the property of Old Hai. Trinket had never had a writing-brush in his hand before and held it like a chopstick. Carrying it over to the bed, he proceeded to draw a small turtle with it on the Little Countess's left cheek.
Her tears continued to flow, turning the drawing into an inky streak.
'I'm doing the pattern with the brush first,' he said. 'I'll be going over it with a knife afterwards. That's what they do when they make seals, isn't it?
Ah, yes, Little Countess, I know what. When the carving's ready, I'll be able to take you out into Changan Street and set up there as a print-seller. "Roll up, roll up!" I'll say. "Buy a nice turtle print, three cash a sheet!"
I'll have your face ready painted over with black ink, then as soon as a customer gives me his three cash: sheet of white paper, rub it over, peel it off, and there's a little turtle! Won't take a moment.
I ought to be able to do a hundred in a day.
That's three hundred cash. Quite a tidy little sum!'
All the time he was gabbling this nonsense, her eyelids never ceased to flutter. He could tell that she was both very angry and very frightened.
This gave him great satisfaction and inspired him to further idiocy. 'Hm, a cow-pat on the right cheek—no, I don't think anyone's going to pay good money for that. A fat pig would be better—a great big, fat, stupid-looking pig. That would sell.'
He moved round to the other side with his brush and executed a crude drawing on her right cheek: a creature with four legs and a tail which could perhaps have been a pig but might equally well have been a cat or a dog.
Then he laid the brush down and took up a pair of silver-shears, the point of which he applied lightly to her left cheek. 'Now, if you don't open your eyes, I'll start cutting.
I'll carve the turtle first. The pig can wait till later.'
The Little Countess's tears were now welling through the closed lids in streams, but still she wouldn't open her eyes.
And since Trinket was unwilling to admit defeat, there was nothing for it but to begin moving the point around on her cheek.
Although she had the most delicate complexion imaginable, the point was so blunt that it made not the slightest mark on her skin; but so great was her fear, that she imagined this horrible boy really was cutting patterns on her face and, from excess of emotion, she fainted clean away.
Trinket got a shock when he saw the change that had come over her and wondered for a moment if she really had died of fright; but when he held his hand against her nostrils, he was relieved to find that she was still breathing. 'Little tart!' he said. 'You're only shamming dead.'
It was by now obvious that she would die sooner than open her eyes for him, but he was damned if he was going to admit defeat.
'As the man reading the songbook while he rode his mule said, "We'll work something out as we go along,"' he thought: 'Old Trink's not going to be beaten by a smelly little girl like you.'
He took a wet cloth and wiped the ink-marks from her cheeks. They came off fairly easily, revealing once more the beauty of her delicate, rather aristocratic features.
She had fine eyebrows, long lashes, a small mouth and a slightly aquiline nose. But Trinket was unimpressed. 'Little Countess Lah-di-dah,' he said. 'I expect you look down on a little eunuch like me. Well, I don't think much of you either, so that makes us quits.'
After a while the Little Countess began to regain consciousness and presently opened her eyes. Startled to see Trinket bending over her, staring, with far from friendly eyes, from barely a foot away, she quickly closed them again.
Trinket laughed gleefully. 'Ha ha! You've opened your eyes now and looked at me. I've won, admit it!'
It was agreeable to have won, but it rather took the gloss off his victory that she couldn't speak. He would have liked to open the vital points that would enable her to do so, but he didn't know how. 'Now that your vital points are closed, you can't eat,' he said. 'If they're not opened, you'll just starve to death.
I was thinking of opening them for you, but though I did once learn the method, it's such a long while ago that I can't remember it.
Do you know how it's done?
If you don't know, just lie there perfectly still. If you do know, blink your eyes three times.'
He watched her intently as she lay there, inert and unblinking. After a long pause, very slowly and deliberately, she blinked her eyes three times.
'Thank heavens for that!' said Trinket delightedly. 'I was beginning to think all of you Mu people were dead from the neck up.'
He lifted her up in his arms and sat her down in a chair. 'Now look,' he said, 'I'm going to start pointing to places on your body. If I point to the right place, blink three times; if it isn't right, just keep your eyes open and don't move.
When I've found the right vital point, I'll open it up for you. Understand?'
The Little Countess blinked three times.
GENTLE READER, What, you may ask, was the origin of this book?
Though the answer to this question may at first seem to border on the absurd, reflection will show that there is a good deal more in it than meets the eye.
Long ago, when the goddess Nǚ-wa was repairing the sky, she melted down a great quantity of rock and, on the Incredible Crags of the Great Fable Mountains, moulded the amalgam into thirty-six thousand, five hundred and one large building blocks, each measuring seventy-two feet by a hundred and forty-four feet square. She used thirty-six thousand five hundred of these blocks in the course of her building operations, leaving a single odd block unused, which lay, all on its own, at the foot of Greensickness Peak in the aforementioned mountains.
Now this block of stone, having undergone the melting and moulding of a goddess, possessed magic powers. It could move about at will and could grow or shrink to any size it wanted.
Observing that all the other blocks had been used for celestial repairs and that it was the only one to have been rejected as unworthy, it became filled with shame and resentment and passed its days in sorrow and lamentation.
One day, in the midst of its lamentings, it saw a monk and a Taoist approaching from a great distance, each of them remarkable for certain eccentricities of manner and appearance. When they arrived at the foot of Greensickness Peak, they sat down on the ground and began to talk.
The monk, catching sight of a lustrous, translucent stone—it was in fact the rejected building block which had now shrunk itself to the size of a fan-pendant and looked very attractive in its new shape—took it up on the palm of his hand and addressed it with a smile: 'Ha, I see you have magical properties!
But nothing to recommend you. I shall have to cut a few words on you so that anyone seeing you will know at once that you are something special. After that I shall take you to a certain brilliant successful poetical cultivated aristocratic elegant delectable luxurious opulent locality on a little trip.'
The stone was delighted. 'What words will you cut?
Where is this place you will take me to?
I beg to be enlightened.'
'Do not ask,' replied the monk with a laugh. 'You will know soon enough when the time comes.'
And with that he slipped the stone into his sleeve and set off at a great pace with the Taoist. But where they both went to I have no idea.
Countless aeons went by and a certain Taoist called Vanitas in quest of the secret of immortality chanced to be passing below that same Greensickness Peak in the Incredible Crags of the Great Fable Mountains when he caught sight of a large stone standing there, on which the characters of a long inscription were clearly discernible.
Vanitas read the inscription through from beginning to end and learned that this was a once lifeless stone block which had been found unworthy to repair the sky, but which had magically transformed its shape and been taken down by the Buddhist mahasattva Impervioso and the Taoist illuminate Mysterioso into the world of mortals, where it had lived out the life of a man before finally attaining nirvana and returning to the other shore. The inscription named the country where it had been born, and went into considerable detail about its domestic life, youthful amours, and even the verses, mottoes and riddles it had written.
All it lacked was the authentication of a dynasty and date.
On the back of the stone was inscribed the following quatrain:
Found unfit to repair the azure sky Long years a foolish mortal man was I.
My life in both worlds on this stone is writ: Pray who will copy out and publish it?
From his reading of the inscription Vanitas realized that this was a stone of some consequence. Accordingly he addressed himself to it in the following manner: 'Brother Stone, according to what you yourself seem to imply in these verses, this story of yours contains matter of sufficient interest to merit publication and has been carved here with that end in view.
But as far as I can see (a) it has no discoverable dynastic period, and (b) it contains no examples of moral grandeur among its characters—no statesmanship, no social message of any kind. All I can find in it, in fact, are a number of females, conspicuous, if at all, only for their passion or folly or for some trifling talent or insignificant virtue. Even if I were to copy all this out, I cannot see that it would make a very remarkable book.'
'Come, your reverence,' said the stone (for Vanitas had been correct in assuming that it could speak) 'must you be so obtuse?
All the romances ever written have an artificial period setting—Han or Tang for the most part. In refusing to make use of that stale old convention and telling my Story of the Stone exactly as it occurred, it seems to me that, far from depriving it of anything, I have given it a freshness these other books do not have.
'Your so-called "historical romances", consisting, as they do, of scandalous anecdotes about statesmen and emperors of bygone days and scabrous attacks on the reputations of long-dead gentlewomen, contain more wickedness and immorality than I care to mention.
Still worse is the "erotic novel", by whose filthy obscenities our young folk are all too easily corrupted.
And the "boudoir romances", those dreary stereotypes with their volume after volume all pitched on the same note and their different characters undistinguishable except by name (all those ideally beautiful young ladies and ideally eligible young bachelors)— even they seem unable to avoid descending sooner or later into indecency.
"The trouble with this last kind of romance is that it only gets written in the first place because the author requires a framework in which to show off his love-poems. He goes about constructing this framework quite mechanically, beginning with the names of his pair of young lovers and invariably adding a third character, a servant or the like, to make mischief between them, like the chou in a comedy.
'What makes these romances even more detestable is the stilted, bombastic language— inanities dressed in pompous rhetoric, remote alike from nature and common sense and teeming with the grossest absurdities.
'Surely my "number of females", whom I spent half a lifetime studying with my own eyes and ears, are preferable to this kind of stuff? I do not claim that they are better people than the ones who appear in books written before my time; I am only saying that the contemplation of their actions and motives may prove a more effective antidote to boredom and melancholy. And even the inelegant verses with which my story is interlarded could serve to entertain and amuse on those convivial occasions when rhymes and riddles are in demand.
'All that my story narrates, the meetings and partings, the joys and sorrows, the ups and downs of fortune, are recorded exactly as they happened. I have not dared to add the tiniest bit of touching-up, for fear of losing the true picture.
'My only wish is that men in the world below may sometimes pick up this tale when they are recovering from sleep or drunkenness, or when they wish to escape from business worries or a fit of the dumps, and in doing so find not only mental refreshment but even perhaps, if they will heed its lesson and abandon their vain and frivolous pursuits, some small arrest in the deterioration of their vital forces.
What does your reverence say to that?'
For a long time Vanitas stood lost in thought, pondering this speech. He then subjected the Story of the stone to a careful second reading.
He could see that its main theme was love; that it consisted quite simply of a true record of real events; and that it was entirely free from any tendency to deprave and corrupt. He therefore copied it all out from beginning to end and took it back with him to look for a publisher.
As a consequence of all this, Vanitas, starting off in the Void (which is Truth) came to the contemplation of Form (which is Illusion); and from Form engendered Passion; and by communicating Passion, entered again into Form; and from Form awoke to the Void (which is Truth). He therefore changed his name from Vanitas to Brother Amor, or the Passionate Monk, (because he had approached Truth by way of Passion), and changed the title of the book from The Story of the S tone to The Tale of Brother Amor.
Old Kong Mei-xi from the homeland of Confucius called the book A Mirror for the Romantic.
Wu Yu-feng called it A Dream of Golden Days.
Cao Xueqin in his Nostalgia Studio worked on it for ten years, in the course of which he rewrote it no less than five times, dividing it into chapters, composing chapter headings, renaming it The Twelve Beauties of Jinling, and adding an introductory quatrain.
Red Inkstone restored the original title when he recopied the book and added his second set of annotations to it.
This, then, is a true account of how The Story of the Stone came to be written.
Pages full of idle words Penned with hot and bitter tears:
All men call the author fool; None his secret message hears.
The origin of The Story of the Stone has now been made clear. The same cannot, however, be said of the characters and events which it recorded. Gentle reader, have patience!
This is how the inscription began: Long, long ago the world was tilted downwards towards the south-east; and in that lower-lying south-easterly part of the earth there is a city called Soochow; and in Soochow the district around the Chang-men Gate is reckoned one of the two or three wealthiest and most fashionable quarters in the world of men.
Outside the Chang-men Gate is a wide thorough-fare called Worldly Way; and somewhere off Worldly Way is an area called Carnal Lane. There is an old temple in the Carnal Lane area which, because of the way it is bottled up inside a narrow cul-de-sac, is referred to locally as Bottle-gourd Temple.
Next door to Bottle-gourd Temple lived a gentleman of private means called Zhen Shi-yin and his wife Feng-shi, a kind, good woman with a profound sense of decency and decorum.
The household was not a particularly wealthy one, but they were nevertheless looked up to by all and sundry as the leading family in the neighbourhood.
Zhen Shi-yin himself was by nature a quiet and totality unambitious person. He devoted his time to his garden and to the pleasures of wine and poetry. Except for a single flaw, his existence could, indeed, have been described as an idyllic one.
The flaw was that, although already past fifty, he had no son, only a little girl, just two years old, whose name was Ying-lian.
Once, during the tedium of a burning summer's day, Shi-yin was sitting idly in his study. The book had slipped from his nerveless grasp and his head had nodded down onto the desk in a doze. While in this drowsy state he seemed to drift off to some place he could not identify, where he became aware of a monk and a Taoist walking along and talking as they went.
'Where do you intend to take that thing you are carrying?' the Taoist was asking.
'Don't you worry about him!' replied the monk with a laugh.
'There is a batch of lovesick souls awaiting incarnation in the world below whose fate is due to be decided this very day. I intend to take advantage of this opportunity to slip our little friend in amongst them and let him have a taste of human life along with the rest.'
'Well, well, so another lot of these amorous wretches is about to enter the vale of tears,' said the Taoist. 'How did all this begin?
And where are the souls to be reborn?'
'You will laugh when I tell you,' said the monk.
'When this stone was left unused by the goddess, he found himself at a loose end and took to wandering about all over the place for want of better to do, until one day his wanderings took him to the place where the fairy Disenchantment lives. 'Now Disenchantment could tell that there was something unusual about this stone, so she kept him there in her Sunset Glow Palace and gave him the honorary title of Divine Luminescent Stone-in-Waiting in the Court of Sunset Glow.
'But most of his time he spent west of Sunset Glow exploring the banks of the Magic River. There, by the Rock of Rebirth, he found the beautiful Crimson Pearl Flower, for which he conceived such a fancy that he took to watering her every day with sweet dew, thereby conferring on her the gift of life.
'Crimson Pearl's substance was composed of the purest cosmic essences, so she was already half-divine; and now, thanks to the vitalizing effect of the sweet dew, she was able to shed her vegetable shape and assume the form of a girl. 'This fairy girl wandered about outside the Realm of Separation, eating the Secret Passion Fruit when she was hungry and drinking from the Pool of Sadness when she was thirsty.
The consciousness that she owed the stone something for his kindness in watering her began to prey on her mind and ended by becoming an obsession. '"I have no sweet dew here that I can repay him with," she would say to herself.
"The only way in which I could perhaps repay him would be with the tears shed during the whole of a mortal lifetime if he and I were ever to be reborn as humans in the world below."
'Because of this strange affair, Disenchantment has got together a group of amorous young souls, of which Crimson Pearl is one, and intends to send them down into the world to take part in the great illusion of human life.
And as today happens to be the day on which this stone is fated to go into the world too, I am taking him with me to Disenchantment's tribunal for the purpose of getting him registered and sent down to earth with the rest of these romantic creatures.'
'How very amusing!' said the Taoist. 'I have certainly never heard of a debt of tears before.
Why shouldn't the two of us take advantage of this opportunity to go down into the world ourselves and save a few souls? It would be a work of merit.'
'That is exactly what I was thinking,' said the monk.
'Come with me to Disenchantment's palace to get this absurd creature cleared. Then, when this last batch of romantic idiots goes down, you and I can go down with them.
At present about half have already been born. They await this last batch to make up the number.'
'Very good, I will go with you then,' said the Taoist.
Shi-yin heard all this conversation quite clearly, and curiosity impelled him to go forward and greet the two reverend gentlemen.
They returned his greeting and asked him what he wanted.
'It is not often that one has the opportunity of listening to a discussion of the operations of karma such as the one I have just been privileged to overhear,'said Shi-yin. 'Unfortunately I am a man of very limited understanding and have not been able to derive the full benefit from your conversation.
If you would have the very great kindness to enlighten my benighted understanding with a somewhat fuller account of what you were discussing, I can promise you the most devout attention. I feel sure that your teaching would have a salutary effect on me and—who knows—might save me from the pains of hell.'
The reverend gentlemen laughed. 'These are heavenly mysteries and may not be divulged.
But if you wish to escape from the fiery pit, you have only to remember us when the time comes, and all will be well.'
Shi-yin saw that it would be useless to press them. 'Heavenly mysteries must not, of course, be revealed. But might one perhaps inquire what the "absurd creature" is that you were talking about?
Is it possible that I might be allowed to see it?'
'Oh, as for that,' said the monk: 'I think it is on the cards for you to have a look at him,' and he took the object from his sleeve and handed it to Shi-yin.
Shi-yin took the object from him and saw that it was a clear, beautiful jade on one side of which were carved the words 'Magic Jade'.
There were several columns of smaller characters on the back, which Shi-yin was just going to examine more closely when the monk, with a cry of 'Here we are, at the frontier of Illusion', snatched the stone from him and disappeared, with the Taoist, through a big stone archway above which THE LAND OF ILLUSION was written in large characters.
A couplet in smaller characters was inscribed vertically on either side of the arch:
Truth becomes fiction when the fiction's true; Real becomes not-teal where the unreal's real.
Shi-yin was on the point of following them through the archway when suddenly a great clap of thunder seemed to shake the earth to its very foundations, making him cry out in alarm. And there he was sitting in his study, the contents of his dream already half forgotten, with the sun still blazing on the ever-rustling plantains outside, and the wet-nurse at the door with his little daughter Ying-lian in her arms.
Her delicate little pink-and-white face seemed dearer to him than ever at that moment, and he stretched out his arms to take her and hugged her to him. After playing with her for a while at his desk, he carried her out to the front of the house to watch the bustle in the street.
He was about to go in again when he saw a monk and a Taoist approaching, the monk scabby-headed and barefoot, the Taoist tousle-haired and limping. They were behaving like madmen, shouting with laughter and gesticulating wildly as they walked along.
When this strange pair reached Shi-yin's door and saw him standing there holding Ying-lian, the monk burst into loud sobs. 'Patron,' he said, addressing Shi-yin, 'what are you doing, holding in your arms that ill-fated creature who is destined to involve both her parents in her own misfortune?'
Shi-yin realized that he was listening to the words of a madman and took no notice.
But the monk persisted: 'Give her to me!
Give her to me!'
Shi-yin was beginning to lose patience and clasping his little girl tightly to him, turned on his heel and was about to re-enter the house when the monk pointed his finger at him, roared with laughter, and then proceeded to intone the following verses:
'Fond man, your pampered child to cherish so— That caltrop-glass which shines on melting snow!
Beware the high feast of the fifteenth day, When all in smoke and fire shall pass away!'
Shi-yin heard all this quite plainly and was a little worried by it. He was thinking or asking the monk what lay behind these puzzling words when he heard the Taoist say, 'We don't need to stay tether. Why don't we part company here and each go about his own business?
Three kalpas from now I shall wait far you on Bei-mang Hill. Having joined forces again there, we can go together to the Land of Illusion to sign off.'
'Excellent!' said the other.
And the two if them went off and soon were both lost to sight.
'There must have been something behind all this,' thought Shi-yin to himself. 'I really ought to have asked him what he meant, but now it is too late.'
He was still standing outside his door brooding when Jia Yu-cun, the poor student who lodged at the Bottle-gourd Temple next door, came up to him.
Yu-cun was a native of Hu-zhou and came from a family of scholars and bureaucrats which had, however, fallen on bad times when Yu-cun was born. The family fortunes on both his father's and mother's side had all been spent, and the members of the family had themselves gradually died off until only Yu-cun was left. There were no prospects for him in his home town, so he had set off for the capital, in search of fame and fortune.
Unfortunately he had got no further than Soochow when his funds ran out, and he had now been living there in poverty for a year, lodging in this temple and keeping himself alive by working as a copyist. For this reason Shi-yin saw a great deal of his company.
As soon as he caught sight of Shi-yin, Yu-cun clasped his hands in greeting and smiled ingratiatingly. 'I could see you standing there gazing, sir. Has anything been happening in the street?'
'No, no,' said Shi-yin.
'It just happened that my little girl was crying, so I brought her out here to amuse her.
Your coming is most opportune, dear boy. I was beginning to feel most dreadfully bored. Won't you come into my little den, and we can help each other to while away this tedious hot day?'
So saying, he called for a servant to take the child indoors, while he himself took Yu-cun by the hand and led him into his study, where his boy served them both with tea.
But they had not exchanged half-a-dozen words before one of the servants rushed in to say that 'Mr Yan had come to pay a call.'
Shi-yin hurriedly rose up and excused himself: 'I seem to have brought you here under false pretences. I do hope you will forgive me. If you don't mind sitting on your own here for a moment, I shall be with you directly.'
Yu-cun rose to his feet too. 'Please do not distress yourself on my account, sir.
I am a regular visitor here and can easily wait a bit.'
But by the time he had finished saying this, Shi-yin was already out of the study and on his way to the guest-room.
Left to himself, Yu-cun was flicking through some of Shi-yin's books of poetry in order to pass the time, when he heard a woman's cough outside the window.
Immediately he jumped up and peered out to see who it was. The cough appeared to have come from a maid who was picking flowers in the garden. She was an unusually good-looking girl with a rather refined face: not a great beauty, by any means, but with something striking about her.
Yu-cun gazed at her spellbound.
Having now finished picking her flowers, this anonymous member of the Zhen household was about to go in again when, on some sudden impulse, she raised her head and caught sight of a man standing in the window. His hat was frayed and his clothing threadbare; yet, though obviously poor, he had a fine, manly physique and handsome, well-proportioned features.
The maid hastened to remove herself from this male presence; but as she went she thought to herself, 'What a fine-looking man! But so shabby! The family hasn't got any friends or relations as poor as that.
It must be that Jia Yu-cun the master is always on about. No wonder he says that he won't stay poor long. I remember hearing him say that he's often wanted to help him but hasn't yet found an opportunity.'
And thinking these thoughts she could not forbear to turn back for another peep or two.
Yu-cun saw her turn back and, at once assuming that she had taken a fancy to him, was beside himself with delight. What a perceptive young woman she must be, he thought, to have seen the genius underneath the rags! A real friend in trouble!
After a while the boy came in again and Yu-cun elicited from him that the visitor in the front room was now staying to dinner. It was obviously out of the question to wait much longer, so he slipped down the passage-way at the side of the house and let himself out by the back gate.
Nor did Shi-yin invite him round again when, having at last seen off his visitor, he learned that Yu-cun had already left.
But then the Mid Autumn festival arrived and, after the family convivialities were over, Shi-yin had a little dinner for two laid out in his study and went in person to invite Yu-cun, walking to his temple lodgings in the moonlight.
Ever since the day the Zhens' maid had, by looking back twice over her shoulder, convinced him that she was a friend, Yu-cun had had the girl very much on his mind, and now that it was festival time, the full moon of Mid Autumn lent an inspiration to his romantic impulses which finally resulted in the following octet:
'Ere on ambition's path my feet are set, Sorrow comes often this poor heart to fret.
Yet, as my brow contracted with new care, Was there not one who, parting, turned to stare?
Dare I, that grasp at windows in the wind, Hope, underneath the moon, a friend to find?
Bright orb, if with my plight you sympathize, Shine first upon the chamber where she lies.'
Having delivered himself of this masterpiece, Yu-cun's thoughts began to run on his unrealized ambitions and, after much head-scratching and many heavenward glances accompanied by heavy sighs, he produced the following couplet, reciting it in a loud, ringing voice which caught the ear of Shi-yin, who chanced at that moment to be arriving:
'The jewel in the casket bides till one shall come to buy. The jade pin in the drawer hides, waiting its time to fly.'
Shi-yin smiled. 'You are a man of no mean ambition, Yu-cun.'
'Oh no!'Yu-cun smiled back deprecatingly. 'You are too flattering. I was merely reciting at random from the lines of some old poet.
But what brings you here, sir?'
'Tonight is Mid Autumn night,'said Shi-yin. 'People call it the Festival of Reunion. It occurred to me that you might be feeling rather lonely here in your monkery, so I have arranged for the two of us to take a little wine together in my study. I hope you will not refuse to join me.'
Yu-cun made no polite pretence of declining. 'Your kindness is more than I deserve,' he said. 'I accept gratefully.'
And he accompanied Shi-yin back to the study next door.
Soon they had finished their tea. Wine and various choice dishes were brought in and placed on the table, already laid out with cups, plates, and so forth, and the two men took their places and began to drink. At first they were rather slow and ceremonious; but gradually, as the conversation grew more animated, their potations too became more reckless and uninhibited.
The sounds of music and singing which could now be heard from every house in the neighbourhood and the full moon which shone with cold brilliance overhead seemed to increase their elation, so that the cups were emptied almost as soon as they touched their lips, and Yu-cun, who was already a sheet or so in the wind, was seized with an irrepressible excitement to which he presently gave expression in the form of a quatrain, ostensibly on the subject of the moon, but really about the ambition he had hitherto been at some pains to conceal:
'In thrice five nights her perfect O is made, Whose cold light bathes each marble balustrade.
As her bright wheel starts on its starry ways, On earth ten thousand heads look up and gaze.'
'Bravo!' said Shi-yin loudly.
'I have always insisted that you were a young fellow who would go up in the world, and now, in these verses you have just recited, I see an augury of your ascent. In no time at all we shall see you up among the clouds!
This calls for a drink!'
And, saying this, he poured Yu-cun a large cup of wine.
Yu-cun drained the cup, then, surprisingly, sighed: 'Don't imagine the drink is making me boastful, but I really do believe that if it were just a question of having the sort of qualifications now in demand, I should stand as good a chance as any of getting myself on to the list of candidates.
The trouble is that I simply have no means of laying my hands on the money that would be needed for lodgings and travel expenses. The journey to the capital is a long one, and the sort of money I can earn from my copying is not enough—'
'Why ever didn't you say this before?' said Shi-yin interrupting him.
'I have long wanted to do something about this, but on all the occasions I have met you previously, the conversation has never got round to this subject, and I haven't liked to broach it for fear of offending you.
Well, now we know where we are. I am not a very clever man, but at least I know the right thing to do when I see it. Luckily, the next Triennial is only a few months ahead. You must go to the capital without delay. A spring examination triumph will make you feel that all your studying has been worth while.
I shall take care of all your expenses. It is the least return I can make for your friendship.'
And there and then he instructed his boy to go with all speed and make up a parcel of fifty tales of the best refined silver and two suits of winter clothes. 'The almanac gives the nineteenth as a good day for travelling,' he went on, addressing Yu-cun again. 'You can set about hiring a boat for the journey straight away.
How delightful it will be to meet again next winter when you have distinguished yourself by soaring to the top over all the other candidates!'
Yu-cun accepted the silver and the clothes with only the most perfunctory word of thanks and without, apparently, giving them a further moment's thought, for he continued to drink and laugh and talk as if nothing had happened.
It was well after midnight before they broke up.
After seeing Yu-cun off, Shi-yin went to bed and slept without a break until the sun was high in the sky next morning.
When he awoke, his mind was still running on the conversation of the previous night. He thought he would write a couple of introductory letters for Yu-cun to take with him to the capital, and arrange for him to call on the family of an official he was acquainted with who might be able to put him up; but when he sent a servant to invite him over, the servant brought back word from the temple as follows:
'The monk says that Mr Jia set out for the capital at five o'clock this morning, sir. He says he left a message to pass on to you. He said to tell you, "A scholar should not concern himself with almanacs, but should act as the situation demands," and he said there wasn't time to say good-bye.'
So Shi-yin was obliged to let the matter drop.
It is a true saying that 'time in idleness is quickly spent'. In no time at all it was Fifteenth Night, and Shi-yin sent little Ying-lian out, in the charge of one of the servants called Calamity, to see the mummers and the coloured lanterns.
It was near midnight when Calamity, feeling an urgent need to relieve his bladder, put Ying-lian down on someone's doorstep while he went about his business, only to find, on his return, that the child was nowhere to be seen.
Frantically he searched for her throughout the rest of the night; but when day dawned and he had still not found her, he took to his heels, not daring to face his master and mistress, and made off for another part of the country.
Shi-yin and his wife knew that something must be wrong when their little girl failed to return home all night. Then a search was made; but all those sent out were obliged in the end to report that no trace of her could be found.
The shock of so sudden a loss to a middle-aged couple who had only ever had the one daughter can be imagined. In tears every day and most of the night, they almost lost the will to go on living, and after about a month like this first Shi-yin and then his wife fell ill, so that doctors and diviners were in daily attendance on them.
Then, on the fifteenth of the third month, while frying cakes for an offering, the monk of Bottle-gourd Temple carelessly allowed the oil to catch alight, which set fire to the paper window.
And, since the houses in this area all had wooden walls and bamboo fences—though also, doubtless, because they were doomed to destruction anyway-the fire leaped from house to house until the whole street was blazing away like a regular Fiery Mountain; and though the firemen came to put it out, by the time they arrived the fire was well under way and long past controlling, and roared away all night long until it had burnt itself out, rendering heaven knows how many families homeless in the process.
Poor Zhens! Though they and their handful of domestics escaped unhurt, their house, which was only next door to the temple, was soon reduced to a heap of rubble, while Shi-yin stood by helpless, groaning and stamping in despair.
After some discussion with his wife, Shi-yin decided that they should move to their farm in the country; but a series of crop failures due to flooding and drought had led to widespread brigandage in those parts, and government troops were out everywhere hunting down the mutinous peasants and making arrests. In such conditions it was impossible to settle on the farm, so Shi-yin sold the land and, taking only two of the maids with them, went with his wife to seek refuge with his father-in-law, Feng Su.
Qin-shi was surprised to hear Bao-yu call out her childhood name in his sleep, but did not like to pursue the matter.
As she stood wondering, Bao-yu, who was still bemused after his dream and not yet in full possession of his faculties, got out of bed and began to stretch himself and to adjust his clothes, assisted by Aroma.
As she was doing up his trousers, her hand, chancing to stray over his thigh, came into contact with something cold and sticky which caused her to draw it back in alarm and ask him if he was all right.
Instead of answering, he merely reddened and gave the hand a squeeze.
Aroma had always been an intelligent girl. She was, in any case, a year or two older than Bao-yu and had recently begun to have some understanding of the facts of life.
Observing the condition that Bao-yu was in, she therefore had more than an inkling of what had happened. Abandoning her question, she busied herself with his clothes, her cheeks suffused by a crimson blush of embarrassment.
When he was properly dressed, they went to rejoin Grandmother Jia and the rest. There they bolted a hurried supper and then slipped back to the other house, where Aroma profited from the absence of the nurses and the other maids to take out a clean undergarment for Bao-yu to change into.
'Please, Aroma,' Bao-yu shamefacedly entreated as she helped him change, 'please don't tell anyone!'
Equally ill at ease, Aroma giggled softly. 'Why did you...?' she began to ask.
Then, after glancing cautiously around, began again. 'Where did that stuff come from?'
Bao-yu blushed furiously and said nothing. Aroma stared at him curiously and continued to giggle.
After much hesitation he proceeded to give her a detailed account of his dream.
But when he came to the part of it in which he made love to Two-in-one, Aroma threw herself forward with a shriek of laughter and buried her face in her hands.
Bao-yu had long been attracted by Aroma's somewhat coquettish charms and tugged at her purposefully, anxious to share with her the lesson he had learned from Disenchantment. Aroma knew that when Grandmother Jia gave her to Bao-yu she had intended her to belong to him in the fullest possible sense, and so, having no good reason for refusing him, she allowed him, after a certain amount of coy resistance, to have his way with her.
From then on Bao-yu treated Aroma with even greater consideration than before, whilst Aroma for her part redoubled the devotion with which she served him.
But of this, for the time being, no more.
The inhabitants of the Rong mansion, if we include all of them from the highest to the humblest in our total, numbered more than three hundred souls, who produced between them a dozen or more incidents in a single day. Faced with so exuberant an abundance of material, what principle should your chronicler adopt to guide him in his selection of incidents to record?
As we pondered the problem where to begin, it was suddenly solved for us by the appearance as it were out of nowhere of someone from a very humble, very insignificant household who, on the strength of a very tenuous, very remote family connection with the Jias, turned up at the Rong mansion on the very day of which we are about to write.
Their name was Wang and they were natives of these parts. A grandfather had held some very small official post in the capital and had there become acquainted with Wang Xi-feng's grandfather, the father of Lady Wang.
Conceiving an admiration for the power and prestige of this greater namesake, he had sought to link his family with the latter's clan by becoming his adoptive nephew.
Only Lady Wang and her elder brother – Wang Xi-feng's father – who chanced at that time to be staying with their parent on his tour of duty at the capital, knew anything about this. The other members of the clan were unaware that any such relationship existed.
The grandfather had long since died, leaving an only son called Wang Cheng who, having fallen on hard times, had moved back into the countryside somewhere outside the capital.
Wang Cheng in his turn had died leaving a son called Gou-er, who had married a girl from a family called Liu and now had two children, a son called Ban-er and a daughter called Qing-er.
The four of them depended on agriculture for their living, and since, with Gou-er himself busy most of the day on the land and his wife busy about the farm drawing water, pounding grain, and the like, there was no one to look after Qing-er and her little brother, Gou-er invited his mother-in-law, old Grannie Liu, to come and live with them.
This Grannie Liu was an ancient widow-woman, rich in experience of the world, who, having no son or daughter-in-law to cherish her, eked out her solitary existence by scratching a livelihood from a miserable half-acre of land.
She therefore embraced her son-in-law's invitation with alacrity and threw herself enthusiastically into the business of helping the young couple to make a living.
The season was now at the turn between autumn and winter. The cold weather was beginning, but none of the preparations for winter had yet been made. By drinking to allay his anxiety, Gou-er merely put himself more out of temper. He returned home to vent some of his spleen on his long-suffering wife.
Grannie Liu could eventually stomach no more of his wife-baiting and intervened on her daughter's behalf. 'Now look here, son-in-law: probably you will think me an interfering old woman; but we country folk have to be grateful for what is in the pot and cut down our appetites to the same measure.
When you were little your Ma and Pa could afford to indulge you; so now you're grown-up you spend all your money as soon as you've got any, without stopping to count the cost; then, when it's all gone, you start making a fuss. But what sort of way is that for a grown man to behave ?
'Now where we live may be out in the country, but it's still "in the Emperor's shadow", as they say.
Over there in the city the streets are paved with money just waiting for someone to go and pick it up.
What's the sense in rampaging around here at home when you could go out and help yourself?'
'It's easy for you to sit on your backside and talk,' said Gou-er rudely, 'but what do you expect me to do? Go out and rob?'
'No one's asking you to rob,' said Grannie Liu.
'But can't we all sit down peaceably and think of a way?
Because if we don't, the money isn't going to come walking in the door of its own accord.'
Gou-er snorted sarcastically. 'If there were a way, do you suppose I should have waited till now before trying it out?
There are no tax-collectors in my family and no mandarins among my friends. What way could there be of laying my hands on some money?
Even if I did have rich friends or relations, I'm not so sure they would want to be bothered with the likes of us.'
'I wouldn't say that,' said Grannie Liu.
'Man proposes, God disposes. It's up to us to think of something. We must leave it to the good Lord to decide whether He'll help us or not. Who knows, He might give us the opportunity we are looking for.
'Now I can think of a chance you might try.
Your family used to be connected with the Wang clan of Nanking.
Twenty years ago the Nanking Wangs used to be very good to you folk. It's only because of late years you have been too stiff-necked to approach them that they have become more distant with you.
'I can remember going to their house once with my daughter. The elder Miss Wang was a very straightforward young lady, very easy to get on with, and not at all high and mighty. She's now the wife of the younger of the two Sir Jias in the Rong mansion.
They say that now she's getting on in years she's grown even more charitable and given to good works than she was as a girl.
Her brother has been promoted; but I shouldn't be surprised if she at least didn't still remember us. Why don't you try your luck with her?
You never know, she might do something for you for the sake of old times.
She only has to feel well disposed and a hair off her arm would be thicker than a man's waist to poor folks like us!'
'That's all very well, Mother,' put in Gou-er's wife, 'but just take a look at us! What sort of state are we in to go calling on great folks like them?
I doubt the people at the door would bother to tell them we were there. Who's going to all that trouble just to make a fool of themselves?'
Gou-er's cupidity, however, had been aroused by the words of his mother-in-law, and his reaction to them was less discouraging than his wife's. 'Well, if it's as you say, Grannie, and being as you've already seen this lady, why not go there yourself and spy out the land for us?'
'Bless us and save us!' said Grannie Liu.
'You know what they say: "A prince's door is like the deep sea."
What sort of creature do you take me for?
The servants there don't know me; it would be a journey wasted.'
'That's no problem,' said Gou-er. 'I'll tell you what to do.
You take young Ban-er with you and ask for Old Zhou that stayed in service with your lady after she married. If you tell them you've come to see him, it will give you an excuse for the visit.
Old Zhou once entrusted a bit of business to my father. He used to be very friendly with us at one time.'
'I knew all about that,' said Grannie Liu.
'But it's a long time since you had anything to do with him and hard to say how he may prove after all these years.
Howsomever.
Being a man, you naturally can't go in your present pickle; and a young married woman like my daughter can't go gallivanting around the countryside showing herself to everybody. But as my old face is tough enough to stand a slap or two, it's up to me to go.
So be it, then. If any good does come of the visit, we shall all of us benefit.'
And so, that very evening, the matter was settled.
Next day Grannie Liu was up before dawn. As soon as she had washed and done her hair, she set about teaching Ban-er a few words to say to the ladies at the great house – an exercise to which he submitted cheerfully enough, as would any little boy of four or five who had been promised an outing to the great city.
That done, she set off on her journey, and in due course made her way to Two Dukes Street.
There, at each side of the stone lions which flanked the gates of the Rong Mansion, she saw a cluster of horses and palanquins.
Not daring to go straight up, she first dusted down her clothes and rehearsed Ban-er's little repertoire of phrases before sidling up to one of the side entrances. A number of important-looking gentlemen sat in the gateway sunning their bellies and discoursing with animated gestures on a wide variety of topics.
Grannie Liu waddled up to them and offered a respectful salutation.
After looking her up and down for a moment or two, they asked her her business.
Grannie Liu smiled ingratiatingly. 'I've come to see Old Zhou that used to be in service with Her Ladyship before she married.
Could I trouble one of you gentlemen to fetch him out for me?'
The gentlemen ignored her request and returned to their discussion. After she had waited there for some considerable time one of them said,' If you stand at that gate along there on the corner, someone from inside the house should be coming out presently.'
But a more elderly man among them protested that it was 'a shame to send her on a fool's errand', and turning to Grannie Liu he said, 'Old Zhou is away in the South at the moment, but his missus is still at home. She lives round at the back.
You'll have to go from here round to the back gate in the other street and ask for her there.'
Grannie Liu thanked him and trotted off with little Ban-er all the way round to the rear entrance. There she found a number of sweetmeat vendors and toy-sellers who had set their wares down outside the gate and were being beseiged by a crowd of some twenty or thirty noisy, yelling children.
She grabbed a small urchin from their midst and drew him towards her. 'Tell me, sonny, is there a Mrs Zhou living here?'
The urchin stared back at her impudently. 'Which Mrs Zhou?
There are several Mrs Zhous here. What's her job?'
'She's the Mrs Zhou that came here with Her Ladyship when she was married.'
'That's easy,' said the urchin. 'Follow me!'
He led Grannie Liu into a rear courtyard. 'That's where she lives,' he said, pointing in the direction of a side wall.
Then, bawling over the wall, 'Mrs Zhou, there's an old woman come to see you!'
Zhou Rui's wife came hurrying out and asked who it was.
'How are you, my dear?' said Grannie Liu, advancing with a smile.
Zhou Rui's wife scrutinized her questioningly for some moments before finally recognizing her. 'Why, it's Grannie Liu! How are you?
It's so many years since I saw you last, I'd forgotten all about you!
Come in and sit down!'
Grannie Liu followed her cackling. 'You know what they say: "Important people have short memories." I wouldn't expect you to remember the likes of us!'
When they were indoors, Zhou Rui's wife ordered her little hired help to pour out some tea.
'And hasn't Ban-er grown a big boy!' said Zhou Rui's wife; then, after a few inquiries about the various things that had happened since they last met, she asked Grannie Liu about her visit. 'Were you just passing by, or have you come specially?'
'Well, of course, first and foremost we came to see you,' replied Grannie Liu mendaciously, 'but we were also hoping to pay our respects to Her Ladyship.
If you could take us to see her, that would be very nice; but if that's not possible, perhaps we could trouble you just to give her our regards.'
From the tone of this reply Zhou Rui's wife was already able to make a pretty good guess as to the real purpose of the old woman's visit; but because some years previously her husband had received a lot of help from Gou-er's father in a dispute over the purchase of some land, she could not very well reject Grannie Liu now, when she came to her as a suppliant. She was, in any case, anxious to demonstrate her own importance in the Jia household; and so the answer she gave her was a gracious one. 'Don't you worry, Grannie!
After you've made such a long pilgrimage, we won't let you go home without seeing a real Buddha!
By rights, of course, Callers and Visitors has nothing to do with me.
You see, we each have our own jobs here. My man's is collecting the half-yearly rents in the spring and autumn; and when he's not doing that, he takes the young masters out when they go on visits. That's all he ever does. Now my job is to attend to their ladyships and the young mistresses when they go out.
But being as how you are a relation of Her ladyship, and since you've put your confidence in me and turned to me to help you, I don't mind breaking the rules for once and taking in a message.
'There's only one thing, though. I don't expect you know, but things here are very different from what they were five years ago.
Nowadays Her Ladyship doesn't run things here any longer. It's Master Lian's wife who does all the managing –
You'll never guess who that is:
Her Ladyship's niece Wang Xi-feng. You know, Her Ladyship's eldest brother's daughter, that we used to call "Feng-ge" when she was a child.'
'Bless you, my dear, for being such a help!' said Grannie Liu.
'Oh Grannie, how can you say such a thing?' said Zhou Rui's wife demurely.
'You know what the old saying is, "He who helps others helps himself."
It's only a question of saying a few words. No trouble at all.'
So saying, she instructed the little maid to slip quietly round to the back of old Lady Jia's quarters and ask if they were serving lunch yet.
The little maid departed on her errand and the two women resumed their conversation.
'This Mrs Lian,' said Grannie Liu: 'she can't be more than eighteen or nineteen years old. She must be a very capable young woman. Fancy her being able to run a great household like this!'
'Oh Grannie, you have no idea!' said Zhou Rui's wife.
'Mrs Lian may be young, but when it comes to doing things, she's got an older head on her shoulders than any I've ever come across.
She's grown up to be a real beauty too, has Mrs Lian. But sharp! Well, if it ever comes to a slanging match, she can talk down ten grown men any day of the week!
Wait till you meet her, and you'll see what I mean.
There's only one thing, though. She's a bit too strict with those beneath her.'
As she was speaking, the little maid came back, her errand completed. 'They've finished serving lunch at Her Old Ladyship's. Mrs Lian is still there.'
Zhou Rui's wife hurriedly rose to her feet and urged Grannie Liu to do likewise. 'Quick! After she comes out from there she'll be free for a few minutes while she has her meal. We must try and catch her then.
If we delay a moment longer, people will start coming in with messages and we shan't have a chance to speak to her.
And once she goes off for her afternoon nap, we've really lost her!'
Grannie Liu got off the kang, adjusted her clothing, conducted Ban-er through a rapid revision of his little stock of phrases and followed Zhou Rui's wife through various twists and turns to Jia Lian's quarters.
Just before they reached them, Zhou Rui's wife planted them both in a covered passage-way while she went on ahead round the screen wall and into the gate of the courtyard. First ascertaining that Wang Xi-feng had not yet left Lady Jia's, she sought out Xi-feng's chambermaid and principal confidante, Patience, and primed her with a full account of Grannie Liu's antecedents. 'She has come all this way today to pay her respects,' she concluded. 'At one time Her Ladyship used to see quite a lot of her, which is why I thought it would be in order for me to bring her in.
I thought I would wait for the young mistress to come back and explain it all to her. I hope she won't be angry with me for pushing myself forward.'
Patience at once made up her mind what to do. 'Let them come in here. They can sit here while they are waiting.'
Zhou Rui's wife went off again to fetch her charges.
As they ascended the steps to the main reception room, a little maid lifted up the red carpet which served as a portiere for them to enter. A strange, delicious fragrance seemed to reach forward and enfold them as they entered, producing in Grannie Liu the momentary sensation that she had been transported bodily to one of the celestial paradises.
Their eyes, too, were dazzled by the bright and glittering things that filled the room. Temporarily speechless with wonder, Grannie Liu stood wagging her head, alternating clicks of admiration with pious ejaculations.
From the glittering reception room they passed to a room on the east side of it in which Jia Lian's baby daughter slept.
Patience, who was standing by the edge of the kang, made a rapid assessment of Grannie Liu and judged it sufficient to greet her with a civil 'how-do-you-do' and an invitation to be seated.
Grannie Liu looked at the silks and satins in which Patience was dressed, the gold and silver ornaments in her hair, her beauty of feature which in every respect corresponded with what she had been told of Wang Xi-feng, and taking the maid for the mistress, was on the point of greeting her as 'Gou-er's aunt', when Zhou Rui's wife introduced her as' Miss Patience'.
Then, when Patience shortly afterwards addressed Zhou Rui's wife as 'Mrs Zhou', she knew that this was no mistress but a very high-class maid.
So Grannie Liu and Ban-er got up on the kang at one side, while Patience and Zhou Rui's wife sat near the edge of it on the other, and a little maid came in and poured them all some tea.
Grannie Liu's attention was distracted by a persistent tock tock tock tock not unlike the sound made by a flour-bolting machine, and she could not forbear glancing round her from time to time to see where it came from. Presently she caught sight of a sort of boxlike object fastened to one of the central pillars of the room, and a thing like the weight of a steelyard hanging down from it, which swung to and fro in ceaseless motion and appeared to be the source of the noise which had distracted her.
'I wonder what that can be,' she thought to herself, 'and what it can be used for?'
As she studied the strange box, it suddenly gave forth a loud dong! like the sound of a bronze bell or a copper chime, which so startled the old lady that her eyes nearly popped out of her head.
The dong! was followed in rapid succession by eight or nine others, and Grannie Liu was on the point of asking what it meant, when all the maids in the house began scurrying about shouting, 'The mistress! The mistress! She'll be coming out now!' and Patience and Zhou Rui's wife hurriedly rose to their feet. 'Just stay here, Grannie,' they said. 'When it is time for you to see her, we shall come in and fetch you'; and they went off with the other servants to greet their mistress.
As Grannie Liu sat in silence, waiting with bated breath and head cocked to one side for her summons, she heard a far-off sound of laughter, followed presently by a sound of rustling dresses as between ten and twenty women entered the reception room and passed from it into the room beyond.
Then two or three women bearing large red lacquer boxes took up their positions on the side nearest the room in which she sat and stood there waiting to be called.
A voice in the far room called out,' Serve now, please!' at which, to judge from the noises, most of the women scuttled off, leaving only the few who were waiting at table.
A long silence ensued in which not so much as a cheep could be heard; then two women came in bearing a small, low table which they set down on the kang. It was covered with bowls and dishes containing all kinds of meat and fish, only one or two of which appeared to have been touched.
At the sight of it Ban-er set up a clamour for some meat and was silenced by Grannie Liu with a resounding slap.
Just at that moment Zhou Rui's wife appeared, her face all wreathed in smiles, and advanced towards Grannie Liu beckoning.
Grannie Liu slipped off the kang, lifted down Ban-er, and exchanged a few hurried whispers with her in the reception room before waddling into the room beyond.
A dark-red patterned curtain hung from brass hooks over the doorway. Inside, under the window in the south wall, there was a kang covered with a dark-red carpet. At the east end of the kang, up against the wooden partition wall, were a backrest and bolster, both covered in gold brocade, and a large flat cushion for sitting on, also glittering with gold thread. Beside them stood a silver spittoon.
Wang Xi-feng had on a little cap of red sable, which she wore about the house for warmth, fastened on with a pearl-studded bandeau. She was dressed in a sprigged peach-pink gown, with an ermine-lined skirt of dark-red foreign crepe underneath it, and a cloak of slate-blue silk with woven coloured insets and lining of grey squirrel around her shoulders. Her face was exquisitely made-up. She was sitting on the edge of the kang, her back straight as a ramrod, with a diminutive pair of tongs in her hand, removing the spent charcoal from a portable hand-warmer.
Patience stood beside her carrying a covered teacup on a tiny inlaid lacquer tray.
Xi-feng appeared not to have noticed her, for she neither reached out for the cup nor raised her head, but continued picking ab-sorbedly at her hand-warmer. At last she spoke: 'Why not ask them in, then?'
As she did so, she raised her head and saw Zhou Rui's wife with her two charges already standing in front of her. She made a confused movement as if to rise to her feet, welcomed the old lady with a look of unutterable benevolence, and almost in the same breath said rather crossly to Zhou Rui's wife, 'Why didn't you tell me?'
By this time Grannie Liu was already down on her knees and had touched her head several times to the floor in reverence to her 'Aunt Feng'.
'Stop her, Zhou dear !' said Xi-feng in alarm. 'She mustn't do that,
I am much too young! In any case, I don't know her very well. I don't know what sort of relations we are and what I should call her.'
'This is the Grannie Liu I was just telling you about,' said Zhou Rui's wife.
Xi-feng nodded, and Grannie Liu sat herself down on the edge of the kang.
Ban-er at once hid himself behind her back and neither threats nor blandishments would induce him to come out and make a bow to his 'Auntie'.
'Relations don't come to see us much nowadays,' said Xi-feng affably. 'We are getting to be quite strangers with everybody.
People who know us realize that it is because you are tired of us that you don't visit us oftener; but some spiteful people who don't know us so well think it's our fault, because we have grown too proud.'
Grannie Liu invoked the Lord Buddha in pious disavowal of so shocking a view. 'It's hard times that keeps us away. We can't afford to visit.
We are afraid that if we came to see you looking the way we are, you would disown us; and even the people at the gate might think we were tramps!'
'Now you are really being too hard on us!
What if Grandfather did make a little bit of a name for himself and we do hold some miserable little appointment? What does it all amount to?
It's all empty show, really. You know what they say: "Even the Emperor has poor relations." It would be strange indeed if we didn't have a few!'
She turned to Zhou Rui's wife. 'Have you told Her Ladyship yet?'
'No, ma'am. I was waiting for your instructions.'
'Go and have a look, then. If she has anyone with her, you had better leave it; but if she is free, tell her about their visit and see what she says.'
Zhou Rui's wife departed on her errand.
Xi-feng told one of the servants to give Ban-er a handful of sweets, and had just begun a desultory conversation with Grannie Liu when a number of domestics and underlings of either sex arrived to report on their duties.
'I am entertaining a guest,' said Xi-feng to Patience when she came in to announce their arrival. 'Let them leave it until this evening.
But if anyone has important business, bring them in and I will deal with it now.'
Patience went out and returned a minute later to say that she had asked them and no one had any business of special importance, so she had sent them all away.
Xi-feng nodded.
At this point Zhou Rui's wife returned with a message for Xi-feng. 'Her Ladyship says she isn't free today, but that if you will entertain them for her, it will be just the same as if she were to receive them herself. She says please thank them very much for coming.
And she says if it's just an ordinary visit she has nothing more to add; but if they have anything particular to say, she says tell them that they can say it to you instead.'
'I hadn't anything particular in mind,' said Grannie Liu. 'Only to look in on Her Ladyship and your mistress. Just a visit to relations.'
'Well all right then, if you are sure you have nothing to say. But if you have got anything to say, you really ought to tell the mistress. It will be just the same as if you were to say it to Her Ladyship.'
Zhou Rui's wife darted a meaningful look at Grannie Liu as she said this.
Grannie Liu perfectly well understood the significance of this look, and a blush of shame overspread her face.
Yet if she did not speak up now, what would have been the purpose of her visit?
She forced herself to say something. 'By rights I ought not to mention it today, seeing that this is our first meeting: but as I have come such a long way to see you, it seems silly not to speak...'
She had got no further when the pages from the outer gate announced the arrival of 'the young master from the Ning mansion' and Xi-feng gestured to her to stop. 'It's all right. There is no need to tell me.'
She turned to the pages. 'Where is Master Rong, then?'
A man's footstep sounded outside and a fresh-faced, willowy youth of seventeen or eighteen in elegant and expensive-looking winter dress came into the room.
Grannie Liu, acutely embarrassed in this male presence, did not know whether to sit or stand, and looked round her in vain for somewhere to hide herself.
Xi-feng laughed at her discomfiture. 'Don't mind him; just stay where you are! It's only my nephew.'
With a good deal of girlish simpering Grannie Liu sat down again, perching herself obliquely on the extreme edge of the kang.
Jia Rong saluted his aunt Manchu fashion. 'My father is entertaining an important visitor tomorrow and he wondered if he might borrow the little glass screen that your Uncle Wang's wife gave you, to put on our kang while he is there. We can let you have it back again as soon as he has gone.'
'You are too late,' said Xi-feng. 'I lent it yesterday to someone else.'
Jia Rong flashed a winning smile at her and half-knelt on the side of the kang. 'If you won't lend it, my father will say that I didn't ask properly and I shall get a beating.
Come on, Auntie, be a sport! Just for my sake!'
Xi-feng smiled maliciously. 'I don't know what's so special about my family's things.
Heaven knows, you have enough stuff of your own over there; yet you have only to set eyes on anything of ours, and you want it for yourselves.'
Jia Rong's smile flashed again. 'Please, Auntie! Be merciful!'
'If it's the tiniest bit chipped,' said Xi-feng, 'I'll have the hide off you!'
She ordered Patience to take the key of the upstairs room and get some reliable servants to carry it over.
Delighted with his good luck, Jia Rong hurriedly forestalled her. 'I'll get some of my own people to carry it. Don't put yours to a lot of trouble!' and he hurried out.
Xi-feng suddenly seemed to remember something, and called to him through the window, 'Rong, come back!'
Servants in the yard outside dutifully took up the cry, 'Master Rong, you're wanted back again!'
Jia Rong came hurrying back, wreathed in smiles, and looked at Xi-feng with eyebrows arched inquiringly.
Xi-feng, however, sipped very intently from her teacup and mused for a while, saying nothing. Suddenly her face flushed and she gave a little laugh: 'It doesn't matter.
Come back again after supper.
I've got company now, and besides, I don't feel in the mood to tell you.'
'Yes, Aunt,' said Jia Rong, and pursing his lips up in a complacent smile he sauntered slowly out of the room.
Having all this while had time to collect herself, Grannie Liu began her speech again: 'The real reason I have brought your little nephew here today is because his Pa and Ma haven't anything in the house to eat, and the weather is getting colder, and – and – I thought I'd bring him here to see you...'
She gave Ban-er a despairing push. 'What did your Pa tell you to say when we got here?
What was it he sent us for?
All you can do is sit there eating sweets!'
It was abundantly clear to Xi-feng that the old lady was too embarrassed to go on, and she put her out of her misery with a gracious smile. 'It's quite all right. There is no need to tell me. I quite understand.'
She turned to Zhou Rui's wife. 'I wonder if Grannie has eaten yet today?'
'We were on our way first thing this morning,' Grannie Liu chimed in. 'There was no time to think about eating.'
Xi-feng gave orders for a meal to be brought in, and Zhou Rui's wife went out and presently reappeared with a guest's portion of various choice dishes on a little table, which she set down in the east wing, and to which she then conducted Grannie Liu and Ban-er for their meal.
'Zhou, dear,' said Xi-feng, 'will you keep them company and see that they have enough to eat? I shan't be able to sit with them myself.'
Then calling her aside for a moment she asked, 'What did Her Ladyship say when you went to report about them just now?'
'She said they don't really belong to the family but were adopted into the clan years ago when your grandfather and theirs were working in the same office.
She said they haven't been round much of late years, but in the old days when they used to visit us we never sent them back empty-handed.
She said it was nice of them to come and see us today and we should be careful to treat them considerately.
And she said if they appear to want anything, she would leave it to you to decide what we should do for them.'
'No wonder!' exclaimed Xi-feng when she had heard this account. 'I couldn't understand how they could be really related to us if I had never even heard of them.'
While they were talking, Grannie Liu came back from the other room having already finished eating, smacking her lips and sucking her teeth appreciatively, and voicing her thanks for the repast.
'Sit down,' said Xi-feng with a smile. 'I have something to say to you. I quite understand what you were trying to tell me just now.
As we are relations, we ought by rights not to wait for you to come to our door before helping you when you are in trouble; but there are so many things to attend to in this family, and now that Her Ladyship is getting on a bit she doesn't always remember them all.
And since I took over the management of the household, I find there are quite a lot of relations that I don't even know about. And then again, of course, though we may look thriving enough from the outside, people don't realize that being a big establishment like ours carries its own difficulties. They won't believe it if you tell them, but it's true.
However, since you have come such a long way, and since this is the first time you have ever said a word about needing help, we obviously can't let you go back empty-handed.
Fortunately it so happens that I still haven't touched any of the twenty taels of silver that Her Ladyship gave me the other day to make clothes for the maids with. If you don't mind it being so little, you are very welcome to take it.'
When Grannie Liu heard Xi-feng talk about 'difficulties' she concluded that there was no hope. Her delight and the way in which her face lit up with pleasure when she heard that she was, after all, to be given twenty taels of silver can be imagined. 'We knew you had your troubles,' she said, 'but as the saying goes, "A starved camel is bigger than a fat horse."
Say what you like, a hair plucked from your arm is thicker than a man's waist to folks like us!'
Horrified by the crudity of these expressions, Zhou Rui's wife, who was standing by, was meanwhile signalling frantically to the old lady to stop.
But Xi-feng laughed quite unconcernedly and told Patience to wrap up the silver and also to fetch a string of cash to go with it. The money was set down in front of Grannie Liu.
'Here is the twenty taels of silver,' said Xi-feng. 'Take this for the time being to make some winter clothes for the children with.
Some time later on, when you have nothing better to do, look in on us for a day or two for kinship's sake.
It's late now, so I won't try to keep you. Give our regards to everybody who ought to be remembered when you get back!'
She rose to her feet, and Grannie Liu, with heartfelt expressions of gratitude, picked up the money and followed Zhou Rui's wife out of the room.
'My dear good woman,' said the latter when they were out of earshot, 'whatever came over you?
First, when you met her, you couldn't get a word out; then, when you did start talking, it was all "your nephew" this and "your nephew" that!
I hope you won't mind my saying so, but even if the child was a real nephew you would still need to go a bit easy on the familiarities.
Now Master Rong, he is her real nephew. That's the sort of person a lady like that calls "nephew" .
Where she would come by a nephew like this one, I just do not know!'
'My dear,' replied Grannie Liu with a laugh, 'when I saw the pretty little darling sitting there, I took such a liking to her that my heart was too full to speak.'
Back in Zhou Rui's quarters the two women sat talking for a while.
Grannie Liu wanted to leave a piece of silver to buy something for the Zhou children with, but Zhou Rui's wife said she wouldn't hear of it and refused absolutely to accept anything.
And so, with many expressions of gratitude, the old lady took her leave and set out once more through the back gate of the mansion.
And if you want to know what happened after she had left, you will have to read the next chapter.
Jia Rui's arrival was announced while Xi-feng and Patience were still talking about him.
'Ask him in,' said Xi-feng.
Hearing that he was to be received, Jia Rui rejoiced inwardly.
He came into the room wreathed in smiles and overwhelmed Xi-feng with civilities.
With feigned solicitude she pressed him to be seated and to take tea.
He became quite ecstatic at the sight of her informal dress. 'Why isn't Cousin Lian back yet?' he asked, staring with fascinated eyes.
'I don't know what the reason can be,' said Xi-feng.
'Could it be,' Jia Rui inquired archly, 'that Someone has detained him on his way home and that he can't tear himself away?'
'Men are all the same!' said Xi-feng. 'They have only to set eyes on a woman to begin another affair.'
'Ah, there you are wrong!' said Jia Rui. 'I am not that sort of man.'
'But how many men are there like you?' said Xi-feng. 'I doubt you could find one in ten.'
At this last remark Jia Rui positively scratched his ears with pleasure.
'You must find it very dull here on your own every day,' he said.
'Yes, indeed!' said Xi-feng.
'If only there were someone who could come and talk to me and help me to pass the time!'
'Well,' said Jia Rui, 'I am always free.
How would it be if I were to come every day to help you pass the time?'
'You must be joking!' said Xi-feng.
'What would you want to come here for?'
'I mean every word I say,' said Jia Rui. 'May I be struck by lightning if I don't!
True, there was a time when I should have been scared to come, because people always told me what a holy terror you were and how dangerous it was to cross you; but now I know that in reality you are all gentleness and fun, there is nothing that could stop me coming.
I would come now if it cost me my life.'
'It's true then,' said Xi-feng, smiling delightedly. 'You really are an understanding sort of person --- so much more so than Rong or Qiang!
I used to think that since they were such handsome and cultured-looking young men they must be understanding as well, but they turned out to be stupid brutes without the least consideration for other people's feelings.'
This little speech went straight to Jia Rui's heart, and unconsciously he began edging his seat nearer to Xi-feng's. He peered closely at an embroidered purse that she was wearing and expressed a strong interest in one of her rings.
'Take care!' said Xi-feng in a low tone. 'The servants might see you!'
Obedient to his goddess's command, Jia Rui quickly drew back again.
Xi-feng laughed. 'You had better go!'
'Ah no, cruel cousin! Let me stay a little longer!'
'Even if you stay, it's not very convenient here in broad daylight, with people coming and going all the time.
Go away now and come hack later when it's dark, at the beginning of the first watch. You can slip into the gallery west of this apartment and wait for me there.'
Jia Rui received these words like someone being presented with a rare and costly jewel. 'Are you sure you're not joking?' he asked hurriedly.
'A lot of people must go through that way. How should we avoid being seen?'
'Don't worry!' said Xi-feng. 'I'll give the watchmen a night off. When the side gates are closed, no one else can get through.'
Jia Rui was beside himself with delight and hurriedly took his leave, confident that the fulfilment of all he wished for was now in sight.
Having waited impatiently for nightfall, he groped his way into the Rong-guo mansion just before they closed the gates and slipped into the gallery, now totally deserted—as Xi-feng had promised it would be—and black as pitch. The gate at the end of the alley-way opening on to Grandmother Jia's quarters had already been barred on the outer side; only the gate at the east end remained open.
For a long time Jia Rui listened intently, but no one came.
Suddenly there was a loud slam and the gate at the east end, too, banged shut.
Alarmed, but not daring to make a sound, Jia Rui stealthily crept out and tried it. It was locked—as tight as a bucket.
Now even if he wanted to get out he could not, for the walls on either side of the alley-way were too high to scale.
Moreover the gallery was bare and draughty and this was the midwinter season when the nights are long and the bitter north wind seems to pierce into the very marrow of the bones. By the end of the night he was almost dead with cold.
When at last morning came, Jia Rui saw the gate at the east end open and an old woman pass through to the gate opposite and call for someone to open up. Still hugging himself against the cold, he sprinted out of the other gate while her back was towards him.
Fortunately no one was about at that early hour, and he was able to slip out of the rear entrance of the mansion and run back home unseen.
Jia Rui had lost both of his parents in infancy and had been brought up under the sole guardianship of his grandfather Jia Dai-ru.
Obsessed by the fear that once outside the house his grandson might indulge in drinking and gambling to the detriment of his studies, Dai-ru had subjected him since early youth to an iron discipline from which not the slightest deviation was tolerated.
Seeing him now suddenly absent himself a whole night from home, and being incapable, in his wildest imaginings, of guessing what had really happened, he took it as a foregone conclusion that he had been either drinking or gaming and had probably passed the night in some house of prostitution --- a supposition which caused the old gentleman to spend the whole night in a state of extreme choler.
The prospect of facing his grandfather on arrival made Jia Rui sweat. A lie of some sort was indispensable. 'I went to see Uncle yesterday,' he managed to say, 'and as it was getting dark, he asked me to stay the night.'
'I have always told you that you are not to go out of that gate without first informing me,' said his grandfather. 'Why then did you presume to go off on your own yesterday without saying a word to anybody?
That in itself would constitute sufficient grounds for chastisement. But in addition to that you are lying!'
Thereupon he, forced him to the ground, and, with the utmost savagery, dealt him thirty or forty whacks with the bamboo, after which he forbade him to eat and made him kneel in the open courtyard with a book in his hand until he had prepared the equivalent of ten days' homework.
The exquisite torments suffered by Jia Rui, as he knelt with an empty stomach in the draughty courtyard reciting his homework after having already been frozen all night long and then beaten, can be imagined.
Yet even now his infatuation remained unaltered. It never entered his mind that he had been made a fool of.
And so two days later, as soon as he had some free time, he was back once more looking for Xi-feng.
She deliberately reproached him for having failed her, thereby so exasperating him that he swore by the most terrible oaths that he had been faithful.
Seeing him hurl himself so willingly into the net, Xi-feng decided that a further lesson would be needed to cure him of his folly and proposed another assignation. 'Only tonight,' she said, 'don't wait for me in that place again. Wait in the empty room in the little passage-way behind this apartment.
But mind you don't run into anybody.'
'Do you really mean this?' said Jia Rui.
'If you don't believe me, don't come!'
'I'll come! I'll come!' said Jia Rui.
'Whatever happens, I shall be there.'
'Now I think you had better go.'
Confident of seeing her again in the evening, Jia Rui went off uncomplainingly, leaving Xi-feng time to muster her forces, brief her officers, and prepare the trap in which the luckless man was to be caught.
Jia Rui waited for the evening with great impatience. By a stroke of bad luck some relations came on a visit and stayed to supper. It was already lamplight when they left, and Jia Rui then had to wait for his grandfather to settle down for the night before he could scuttle off to the Rong mansion and make his way to the room in the little passage-way where Xi-feng had told him to go. He waited there for her arrival with the frenzied agitation of an ant on a hot saucepan.
Yet, though he waited and waited, not a human shape appeared nor a human sound was heard, and he began to be frightened and a little suspicious: 'Surely she won't fail me? Surely I shan't be made to spend another night in the cold...?'
As he was in the midst of these gloomy imaginings, a dark figure glided into the room.
Certain that it must be Xi-feng, Jia Rui cast all caution to the winds and, when the figure approached him, threw himself upon it like a hungry tiger seizing its prey or a cat pouncing on a harmless mouse. 'My darling, how I have waited for you!" he exclaimed, enfolding his beloved in his arms; and carrying her to the kang, he laid her down and began kissing her and tugging at her trousers, murmuring 'my sweetest darling' and 'my honey love' and other such endearments in between kisses.
Throughout all of this not a single sound was uttered by his partner. Jia Rui now tore down his own trousers and prepared to thrust home his hard and throbbing member.
Suddenly a light flashed --- and there was Jia Qiang holding aloft a candle in a candlestick which he shone around: 'Who is in this room?'
At this the person on the kang gave a giggle: 'Uncle Rui is trying to bugger me!'
Horrors! The sight he saw when he looked down made Jia Rui want to sink into the ground.
It was Jia Rong!
He turned to bolt, but Jia Qiang held him fast. 'Oh no you don't!
Auntie Lian has already told Lady Wang that you have been pestering her. She asked us to keep you here while she went to tell.
When Lady Wang first heard, she was so angry that she fainted, but now she's come round again and is asking for you to be brought to her.
Come along, then! Off we go!'
At these words Jia Rui's soul almost left its seat in his body. 'My dear nephew, just tell her that you didn't find me here!' he said. 'Tomorrow I will reward you handsomely.'
'I suppose I could let you go easily enough,' said Jia Qiang. 'The question is, how big would this reward be?
In any case, just saying that you will give me a reward is no good. I should want a written guarantee.'
'But I can't put a thing like this down in writing!'
'No problem there,' said Jia Qiang. 'Just say that you've lost money gambling and have borrowed such and such an amount to cover your losses. That's all you need do.'
'I could do that, certainly,' said Jia Rui.
Jia Qiang at once disappeared and reappeared only a moment later with paper and a writing-brush which had evidently been made ready in advance. Writing at his dictation Jia Rui was compelled, in spite of protests, to put down fifty taels of silver as the amount on the IOU. The document, having been duly signed, was at once pocketed by Jia Qiang, who then pretended to seek the connivance of Jia Rong.
But Jia Rong feigned the most obdurate incorruptibility and insisted that he would lay the matter next day before a council of the whole clan and see that justice was done.
Jia Rui became quite frantic and kotowed to him.
Finally, under pressure from Jia Qiang and in return for another IOU for fifty taels of silver made out in his favour, he allowed his scruples to be overcome.
'You realize, don't you,' said Jia Qiang, 'that I'm going to get into trouble for this?
The gate leading to Lady Jia's courtyard was bolted some time ago, and Sir Zheng is at the moment in the main reception room looking at some stuff that has just arrived from Nanking, so you can't go through that way.
The only way left would be through the back gate.
The trouble is, though, that if you leave now, you might run into someone on the way, and then I should get into even worse trouble.
You'd better let me scout around a bit first and come for you when the coast is clear.
In the meantime you can t hide here, though, because they will shortly be coming in to store the stuff from Nanking here. I'll find somewhere else for you.'
He took Jia Rui by the arm, and having first blown the candle out, led him into the courtyard and groped his way round to the underside of the steps which led up to the terrace of the central building. 'This hollow under the steps will do.
Crouch down there, and don't make a sound!
You can go when I come for you.'
Jia Qiang and Jia Rong then went off leaving him to himself.
Jia Rui, by now a mere automaton in the hands of his captors, obediently crouched down beneath the steps and was just beginning a series of calculations respecting his present financial predicament when a sudden slosh! signalled the discharge of a slop-pail's stinking contents immediately above his head, drenching him from top to toe with liquid filth and causing him to cry out in dismay --- but only momentarily, for the excrement covered his face and head and caused him to close his mouth again in a hurry and crouch silent and shivering in the icy cold.
Just then Jia Qiang came running up: 'Hurry! hurry! You can go now.'
At the word of command Jia Rui bounded out of his hole and sprinted for dear life through the rear gate and back to his own home. It was now past midnight, and he had to shout for someone to let him in.
When the servant who answered the gate saw the state he was in and asked him how it had happened, he had to pretend that he had been out in the darkness to ease himself and had fallen into the jakes.
Then rushing into his own room he stripped off his clothes and washed, his mind running all the time on how Xi-feng had tricked him. The thought of her trickery provoked a surge of hatred in his soul; yet even as he hated her, the vision of her loveliness made him long to clasp her to his breast.
Torn by these violent and conflicting emotions, he passed the whole night without a single wink of sleep.
From that time on, though he longed for Xi-feng with unabated passion, he never dared to visit the Rong-guo mansion again.
Jia Rong and Jia Qiang, on the other hand, came frequently to his house to ask for their money, so that he was in constant dread of his grandfather finding out about the IOUs.
Unable, even now, to overcome his longing for Xi-feng, saddled with a heavy burden of debt, harassed during the day time by the schoolwork set him by his exacting grandfather, worn-out during the nights by the excessive hand-pumping inevitable in an unmarried man of twenty whose mistress was both unattainable and constantly in his thoughts, twice frozen, tormented and forced to flee --- what constitution could withstand so many shocks and strains without succumbing in the end to illness?
The symptoms of Jia Rui's illness—a palpitation in the heart, a loss of taste in the mouth, a weakness in the hams, a smarting in the eyes, feverishness by night and lassitude by day, albumen in the urine and blood-flecks in the phlegm—had all manifested themselves within less than a year.
By that time they had produced a complete breakdown and driven him to his bed, where he lay, with eyes tight shut, babbling deliriously and inspiring terror in all who saw him.
Physicians were called in to treat him and some bushels of cinnamon bark, autumn root, turtle-shell, black leek and Solomon's seal must at one time and another have been infused and taken without the least observable effect.
Winter went and spring came and Jia Rui's sickness grew even worse.
His grandfather Dai-ru was in despair. Medical advice from every quarter had been taken and none of it had proved effective.
The most recent advice was that the patient should be given a pure decoction of ginseng without admixture of other ingredients. So costly a remedy was far beyond Dai-ru's resources and he was obliged to go to the Rong-guo mansion to beg.
Lady Wang ordered Wang Xi-feng to weigh out two ounces for him from their own supplies.
'The other day when we were making up a new lot of pills for Grandmother,' said Xi-feng, 'you told me to keep any of the remaining whole roots for a medicine you were sending to General Yang's wife. I sent her the medicine yesterday, so I am afraid we haven't any left.'
'Well, even if we haven't got any,' said Lady Wang, 'you can send to your mother-in-law's for some; and probably they will have some at your Cousin Zhen's. Between you you ought somehow or other to be able to raise enough to give him. If you can save a man's life by doing so, you will have performed a work of merit.'
But though Xi-feng pretended to do as Lady Wang suggested, in fact she made no such inquiries.
She merely scraped a few drams of broken bits together and sent them to Dai-ru with a message that 'Lady Wang had instructed her to send this, and it was all they had.'
To Lady Wang, however, she reported that she had asked the others and altogether obtained more than two ounces of ginseng which she had sent to Dai-ru.
Jia Rui now wanted desperately to live and eagerly swallowed every medicine that they offered him; but all was a waste of money, for nothing seemed to do him any good.
One day a lame Taoist appeared at the door asking for alms and claiming to be able to cure retributory illnesses.
Jia Rui, who chanced to overhear him, called out from his bed: 'Quick, tell the holy man to come in and save me!' and as he called, he kotowed with his head on the pillow.
The servants were obliged to bring the Taoist into the bedroom.
Jia Rui clung to him tenaciously. 'Holy one, save me!' he cried out again and again.
The Taoist sighed. 'No medicine will cure your sickness.
However, I have a precious thing here that I can lend you which, if you will look at it every day, can be guaranteed to save your life.'
So saying, he took from his satchel a mirror which had reflecting surfaces on both its sides. The words A MIRROR FOR THE ROMANTIC were inscribed on the back. He handed it to Jia Rui.
'This object comes from the Hall of Emptiness in the Land of Illusion. It was fashioned by the fairy Disenchantment as an antidote to the ill effects of impure mental activity. It has life-giving and restorative properties and has been brought into the world for the contemplation of those intelligent and handsome young gentlemen whose hearts are too susceptible to the charms of beauty.
I lend it to you on one important condition: you must only look into the back of the mirror. Never, never under any circumstances look into the front.
Three days hence I shall come again to reclaim it, by which time I guarantee that your illness will have gone.'
With that he left, at a surprising speed, ignoring the earnest entreaties of those present that he should stay longer.
'This is intriguing!' Jia Rui thought to himself when the Taoist gave him the mirror. 'Let me try looking into it as he says,' and holding it up to his face he looked into the back as instructed and saw a grinning skull, which he covered up hastily with a curse:
'Silly old fool, to scare me like that! ---
But let me see what happens when I look into the other side!'
He turned the mirror round and looked, and there inside was Xi-feng beckoning to him to enter, and his ravished soul floated into the mirror after her. There they performed the act of love together, after which she saw him out again.
But when he found himself once more back in his bed he stared and cried out in horror: for the mirror, of its own accord, had turned itself round in his hand and the same grinning skull faced him that he had seen before.
He could feel the sweat trickling all over his body and lower down in the bed a little pool of semen that he had just ejaculated.
Yet still he was not satisfied, and turned the face of the mirror once more towards him. Xi-feng was there beckoning to him again and calling, and again he went in after her. He did this three or four times.
But the last time, just as he was going to return from the mirror, two figures approached him holding iron chains which they fastened round him and by which they proceeded to drag him away.
He cried out as they dragged him: 'Wait! Let me take the mirror with me . . .!'
Those were the last words he ever uttered.
To those who stood around the bed and watched him while this was happening he appeared first to be holding up the mirror and looking into it, then to let it drop; then to open his eyes in a ghastly stare and pick it up again; then, as it once more fell from his grasp, he finally ceased to move.
When they examined him more closely they found that his breathing had already stopped and that underneath his body there was a large, wet, icy patch of recently ejaculated semen.
At once they lifted him from the bed and busied themselves with the laying-out, while old Dai-ru and his wife abandoned themselves to a paroxysm of grief. They cursed the Taoist for a necromancer and ordered the servants to heap up a fire and cast the mirror upon the flames.
But just at that moment a voice was heard in the air saying, 'Who told him to look in the front?
It is you who are to blame, for confusing the unreal with the real! Why then should you burn my mirror?'
Suddenly the mirror was seen to rise up and fly out of the room, and when Dai-ru went outside to look, there was the lame Taoist asking for it back.
He snatched it as it flew towards him and disappeared before Dai-ru's very eyes.
Seeing that there was to be no redress, Dai-yu was obliged to set about preparing for the funeral and began by announcing his grandson's death to everybody concerned.
Reading of the sutras began on the third day and on the seventh the coffin was drawn in procession to temporary lodging in the Temple of the Iron Threshold to await future reburial.
The various members of the Jia family all came in due course to offer their condolences.
From the Rong-guo side Jia She and Jia Zheng each gave twenty taels of silver and from the Ning-guo side Cousin Zhen also gave twenty taels. The other members of the clan gave amounts varying from one to four taels according to their means.
A collection made among the parents of the dead man's fellow-students raised an additional twenty or thirty taels.
Although Dai-ru's means were slender, with so much monetary help coming in he was able to perform the whole business in considerable style.
Towards the end of the year in which Jia Rui's troubles started Lin Ru-hai fell seriously ill and wrote a letter asking to see Dai-yu again.
Though Grandmother Jia was plunged into deepest gloom by the letter, she was obliged to prepare with all possible expedition for her granddaughter's departure.
And Bao-yu, though he too was distressed at the prospect of Dai-yu's leaving him, could scarcely seek to interfere in a matter affecting the natural feelings of a father and his child.
Grandmother Jia insisted that Jia Lian should accompany Dai-yu and see her safely there and back.
The various gifts to be taken and the journey-money were, it goes without saying, duly prepared.
A suitable day on which to commence the journey was quickly determined and Jia Lian and Dai-yu took leave of all the rest and, embarking with their attendants, set sail for Yangchow.
If you wish for further details, you may learn them in the following chapter.
We have shown how Bao-yu was in Dai-yu's room telling her the story of the magic mice; how Bao-chai burst in on them and twitted Bao-yu with his failure to remember the 'green wax' allusion on the night of the Lantern Festival; and how the three of them sat teasing each other with good-humoured banter.
Bao-yu had been afraid that by sleeping after her meal Dai-yu would give herself indigestion or suffer from insomnia through being insufficiently tired when she went to bed at night, but Bao-chai's arrival and the lively conversation that followed it banished all Dai-yu's desire to sleep and enabled him to lay aside his anxiety on her behalf.
Just then a sudden commotion arose from the direction of Bao-yu's room, and the three of them stopped talking and turned their heads to listen. Dai-yu was the first to speak: 'That's your Nannie quarrelling with Aroma,' she said.
'To think how that poor girl goes out of her way to be nice to the old woman, yet still she manages to find fault with her! She really must be getting senile.'
Bao-yu was for rushing over straight away, but Bao-chai restrained him: 'Don't go quarrelling with your Nannie, whatever you do!
She's only a silly old woman. You have to indulge her a bit.'
'Of course,' said Bao-yu and ran off.
He found Nannie Li leaning on her stick in the middle of the room abusing Aroma: 'Ungrateful little baggage!
After all I've done for you – and now when I come to call on you, you lie back there on the kang like a young madam and haven't even the grace to look up and take notice of me! You and your airs and graces!
All you ever think about is how to win Bao-yu over to you. Thanks to you he won't listen to me any more. He only does what you say.
To think that a cheap bit of goods like you that they only paid a few taels of silver for should come along here and turn the whole place upside down!
The best thing they could do with you would be to marry you off to one of the boys and send you packing. Then we'd see how you managed to play the siren and lead young gentlemen astray!'
Aroma at first thought that Nannie Li's anger arose solely on account of her failure to get up and welcome her, and had started to excuse herself on that supposition: 'I'm ill, Mrs Li. I've just been sweating. I didn't see you because I had my head under the clothes.'
But when the old woman proceeded to go on about leading young men astray and marrying her off to a servant and what not, she felt wronged and humiliated, and in spite of her efforts to restrain them, burst into tears of sheer helplessness.
Bao-yu had heard all this, and though too embarrassed to argue, could scarcely refrain from saying a word or two in Aroma's defence: 'She's ill. She's having to take medicine,' he said. 'If you don't believe me, ask any of the maids.'
This made the old woman even angrier. 'Oh yes! You stick up for the little hussies! You don't care about me any more!
And which of them am I supposed to ask, pray?
They will all take your side against me.
You are all under Aroma's thumb, every one of you.
I know what goes on here, don't think I don't!
Well, you can come along with me to see Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship about this. Let them hear how you have cast me off – me that reared you at my own breast – now that you don't need my milk any more, and how you encourage a pack of snotty-nosed little maidservants to amuse themselves at my expense!'
She was in tears herself by now, and wept as she cursed.
By this time Dai-yu and Bao-chai had also arrived on the scene and did their best to calm her: 'Come, Nannie! Be a bit more forbearing with them! Try to forget about it!'
Nannie Li turned towards this new audience and proceeded to pour out her troubles in an interminable gabble in which tea and Snowpink and drinking koumiss mingled incoherently.
Xi-feng happened to be in Grandmother Jia's room totting up the day's scores for the final settlement when she heard this hubbub in the rear apartment. She identified it immediately as Nannie Li on the rampage once more, taking out on Bao-yu's unfortunate maids some of the spleen occasioned by her recent gambling losses.
At once she hurried over, seized Nannie Li by the hand, and admonished her with smiling briskness: 'Now, Nannie, we mustn't lose our tempers!
This is the New Year holiday and Her Old Ladyship has been enjoying herself all day.
A person of your years ought to be stopping other people from quarrelling, not upsetting Her Old Ladyship by quarrelling yourself. Surely you know better than that?
If anyone has been misbehaving, you have only to tell me and I'll have them beaten for you.
Now I've got a nice hot pheasant stew in my room. You just come along with me and you shall have some of that and a drink to go with it!'
She proceeded to haul her off the premises, addressing a few words over her shoulder to her maid Felicity as she went: 'Felicity, bring Nannie's stick for her, there's a good girl! And for goodness' sake give her a handkerchief to wipe her eyes with!'
Unable to hold her ground, the old Nannie was borne off in Xi-feng's wake, muttering plaintively as she went: 'I wish I was dead, I really do! But I'd sooner forget meself and make a scene like I have today and be shamed in front of you all than put up with the insolence of those shameless little baggages!'
Watching this sudden exit, Bao-chai and Dai-yu laughed and clapped their hands: 'How splendid! Just the sort of wind we needed to blow the old woman away!'
But Bao-yu shook his head and sighed: 'I wonder what had really upset her. Obviously she only picked on Aroma because she is weak and can't defend herself.
I wonder which of the girls had offended her to make her so...'
He was interrupted by Skybright: 'Why should any of us want to upset her? Do you think we're mad ?
And even if we had offended her, we should be perfectly capable of owning up to it and not letting someone else take the blame!'
Aroma grasped Bao-yu's hand and wept: 'Because I offended one old nurse, you have to go offending a whole roomful of people. Don't you think there's been enough trouble already without dragging other people into it?'
Seeing how ill she looked and realizing that distress of mind could only aggravate her condition, Bao-yu stifled his indignation and did his best to comfort her so that she might be able to settle down once more and continue sweating out the fever.
Her skin was burning to the touch. He decided to stay with her for a while, and lying down beside her, spoke to her soothingly: 'Just try to get better, now! Never mind all that other nonsense! It's of no importance.'
Aroma smiled bitterly. 'If I had allowed myself to get upset about things like that, I shouldn't have lasted in this room for five minutes!
Still, if we're always going to have this sort of trouble, I think in the long run I just shan't be able to stand any more.
You don't seem to realize. You offend people on my account and the next moment you've forgotten all about it. But they haven't. It's all scored up against me; and as soon as something goes a bit wrong, they come out with all these horrible things about me. It makes it so unpleasant for all of us.'
She cried weakly as she said this, but presently checked herself for fear of upsetting Bao-yu.
Soon the odd-job woman came in with the second infusion of Aroma's medicine.
Bao-yu could see that she had started sweating again and told her not to get up, holding the medicine for her himself and supporting her while she drank it. Then he told one of the junior maids to make up a bed for her on the kang.
'Whether you're going to eat there or not,' Aroma said to him, 'you'd better go and sit with Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship for a bit and play a while with the young ladies before you come back here again.
I shall be all right if I lie here quietly on my own.'
Bao-yu thought he had better do as she said, and after waiting until she had taken off her ornaments and was lying tucked up in bed, he went to the front apartment and took his dinner with Grandmother Jia.
After dinner Grandmother Jia wanted to go on playing cards with some of the old stewardesses.
Bao-yu, still worrying about Aroma, returned to his own room, where he found her sleeping fitfully.
He thought of going to bed himself, but it was still too early.
Skybright, Mackerel, Ripple and Emerald had gone off in quest of livelier entertainment, hoping to persuade Grandmother Jia's maids, Faithful and Amber, to join them in a game.
Only Musk was left in the outer room, playing Patience under the lamp with a set of dominoes.
Bao-yu smiled at her. 'Why don't you go off to join the others?'
'I haven't got any money.'
'There's a great pile of money under the bed. Isn't that enough for you to lose?'
'If we all went off to play,' said Musk, 'who would look after this room?
There's her sick inside. And lamps and stoves burning everywhere. The old women were practically dead on their feet after waiting on you all day; I had to let them go and rest.
And the girls have been on duty all day, too. You could scarcely grudge them some time off now for amusement.
-Which leaves only me to look after the place.'
'Another Aroma,' thought Bao-yu to himself and gave her another smile. 'I'll sit here while you're away. There's nothing to worry about here if you'd like to go.'
'There's even less excuse for going if you are here,' said Musk.
'Why can't we both sit here and talk?'
'What can we do?' said Bao-yu.
'Just sitting here talking is going to be rather dull.
I know! You were saying this morning that your head was itchy. As you haven't got anything else to do now, I'll comb it for you.'
'All right,' said Musk, and fetching her toilet-box with the mirror on top she proceeded to take off her ornaments and shake her hair out. Bao-yu took a comb and began to comb it for her.
But he had not drawn it more than four or five times through her hair, when Skybright came bursting in to get some more money. Seeing the two of them together, she smiled sarcastically: 'Fancy!
Doing her hair already – before you've even drunk the marriage-cup!'
Bao-yu laughed. 'Come here! I'll do yours for you too, if you like!'
'I wouldn't presume, thanks all the same!'
She took the money, and with a swish of the door-blind was gone.
Bao-yu was standing behind Musk as she sat looking at herself in the mirror. Their eyes met in the glass and they both laughed.
'Of all the girls in this room she has the sharpest tongue,' said Bao-yu.
Musk signalled to him agitatedly in the glass with her hand.
Bao-yu took her meaning; but it was too late. With another swish of the door-blind, Skybright had already darted in again. 'Oh! Sharp-tongued, am I?
Perhaps you'd like to say a bit more on that subject?'
'Get along with you!' laughed Musk. 'Don't go starting any more arguments!'
'And don't you go sticking up for him!' said Skybright gaily.
'I know what you're up to, you two. You don't deceive me with your goings-on.
I'll have something to say to you about this when I get back later. Just wait until I've won some of my money back!'
With that she darted off once more.
When Bao-yu had finished combing her hair, he asked Musk to help him get to bed – very quietly, so as not to disturb Aroma.
And that ends our account of that day.
First thing next morning Aroma awoke to find that she had sweated heavily during the night and that her body felt very much lighter; but she would take only a little congee for breakfast in order not to tax her system too soon.
Bao-yu saw that there was no further cause for concern, and after his meal drifted off to Aunt Xue's apartment in search of amusement.
Now this was the prime of the year, when the schoolroom is closed for the New Year holiday and the use of the needle is forbidden to maidenly fingers throughout the whole of the Lucky Month, so that boys and girls alike are all agreeably unemployed, and Bao-yu's half-brother Jia Huan, on holiday like all the rest, had also drifted over to Aunt Xue's place in search of amusement.
He found Bao-chai, Caltrop and Oriole there playing a game of Racing Go, and after watching them for a bit, wanted to play too.
Bao-chai had always behaved towards Jia Huan in exactly the same way as she did towards Bao-yu and made no distinctions between them. Consequently, when he asked to play, she at once made a place for him and invited him to join them on the kang.
They played for stakes of ten cash each a game.
Jia Huan won the first game and felt very pleased.
But then, as luck would have it, he lost several times in a row and began to get somewhat rattled.
It was now his turn to throw the dice. He needed seven to win, and if he threw anything less than seven, the dice would go next to Oriole, who needed only three.
He hurled them from the pot with all his might. One of them rested at two. The other continued rather erratically to roll about.
'Ace! Ace! Ace!' cried Oriole, clapping her hands.
'Six! Seven! Eight!' shouted Jia Huan glaring at Oriole and commanding the die to perform the impossible.
But the perverse wanderer finally came to rest with the ace uppermost, making a grand total of three.
With the speed of desperation Jia Huan reached out and snatched it up, claiming, as he did so, that it was a six.
'It was an ace,' said Oriole, 'as plain as anything!'
Bao-chai could see that Jia Huan was rattled, and darting a sharp look at Oriole, commanded her to yield. 'You grow more unmannerly every day,' she told her.
'Surely you don't think one of the masters would cheat you?
Come on! Put your money down!'
Oriole smarted with the injustice of this, but her mistress had ordered it, so she had to pay up without arguing. She could not, however, forbear a few rebellious mutterings: 'Huh! One of the masters! Cheating a maid out of a few coppers! Even I should be ashamed!
Look how much money Bao-yu lost when he was playing with us the other day, yet he didn't mind. Even when some of the maids took all he had left, he only laughed...'
She would have gone on, but Bao-chai checked her angrily.
'How can I hope to compete with Bao-yu?' said Jia Huan, beginning to blubber.
'You're all afraid of him. You all take his part against me because I'm only a concubine's son.'
Bao-chai was shocked: 'Please don't say things like that, Cousin! You'll make yourself ridiculous.'
Once more she rebuked Oriole.
Just at that moment Bao-yu walked in, and seeing the state that Jia Huan was in, asked him what was the matter.
But Jia Huan dared not say anything.
Bao-chai, familiar with the state of affairs, normal in other families, which places the younger brother in fearful subjection to the elder, assumed that Jia Huan was afraid of Bao-yu.
She was unaware that Bao-yu positively disliked anyone being afraid of him.
'We are both equally subject to our parents' control,' he would say of himself and Jia Huan. 'Why should I create a greater distance between us by trying to control him myself – especially when I am the wife's son and he is the concubine's? People already talk behind our backs, even when I do nothing. It would be ten times worse if I were to start bossing him about.'
But there was another, zanier, notion which contributed to this attitude.
Let us try to explain it.
Bao-yu had from early youth grown up among girls. There were his sisters Yuan-chun and Tan-chun, his cousins of the same surname Ying-chun and Xi-chun, and his distaff-cousins Shi Xiang-yun, Lin Dai-yu and Xue Bao-chai. As a result of this upbringing, he had come to the conclusion that the pure essence of humanity was all concentrated in the female of the species and that males were its mere dregs and off-scourings.
To him, therefore, all members of his own sex without distinction were brutes who might just as well not have existed.
Only in the case of his father, uncles and brother, where rudeness and disobedience were expressly forbidden by the teachings of Confucius, did he make an exception – and even then the allowances he made in respect of the fraternal bond were extremely perfunctory. It certainly never occurred to him that his own maleness placed him under any obligation to set an example to the younger males in his clan.
The latter – Jia Huan included – reciprocated with a healthy disrespect only slightly tempered by their fear of his doting grandmother.
But Bao-chai was ignorant of all this; and fearing that Bao-yu might embarrass them all by delivering a big brother's telling-off, she hastened to Jia Huan's defence.
'What are you crying about in the middle of the New Year holidays?' said Bao-yu to Jia Huan, ignoring Bao-chai's excuses.
'If you don't like it here, why don't you go somewhere else?
I think your brains must have been addled by too much study.
Can't you see that if there is something you don't like, there must be something else you do like, and that all you've got to do is leave the one and go after the other?
Not hang on to it and cry. Crying won't make it any better.
You came here to enjoy yourself, didn't you? And now you're here you're miserable, right?
Then the thing to do is to go somewhere else, isn't it?'
In the face of such an argument Jia Huan could not very well remain. When he got back to his own apartment, his real mother, 'Aunt' Zhao (Lady Wang was his mother only in name) observed the dejected state he was in. 'Who's been making a doormat of you this time?' she asked him, and, obtaining no immediate reply, asked again. 'I've just been playing at Bao-chai's.
Oriole cheated me and Bao-yu turned me out.'
Aunt Zhao spat contemptuously: 'Nasty little brat! That's what comes of getting above yourself.
Who asked you to go playing with that lot? You could have gone anywhere else to play. Asking for trouble!'
Just at that moment Xi-feng happened to be passing by outside, and hearing what she said, shouted back at her through the window: 'What sort of language is that to be using in the middle of the New Year holiday?
He's only a child. He hasn't done anything terrible. What do you want to go carrying on at him like that for?
No matter where he's been, Sir Zheng and Lady Wang are quite capable of looking after him themselves. There's no cause for you to go biting his head off!
After all, he is one of the masters. If he's misbehaved himself, you should leave the telling-off to those whose job it is. It's no business of yours.
Huan! Come out here!
Come and play with me!'
Jia Huan had always been afraid of Xi-feng – more even than he was of Lady Wang – and hearing her call him, came running out immediately.
Aunt Zhao dared not say a word.
'You're a poor-spirited creature!' Xi-feng said to him.
'How many times have I told you that you can eat and drink and play with any of the boys and girls you like?
But instead of doing as I say, you hang about with these other people and let them warp your mind for you and fill it up with mischief.
You've no self-respect, that's your trouble. Can't keep away from the gutter. You insist on making yourself disagreeable and then you complain that people are prejudiced against you!
Fancy making a fuss like that about losing a few coppers!
How much did you lose?'
'One or two hundred,' Jia Huan muttered abjectly.
'All this fuss about one or two hundred cash! And you one of the masters!'
She turned to Felicity. 'Go and get a string of cash for him, Felicity, and take him round to the back where Miss Ying and the girls are playing!
And if I have any more of this nonsense from you in future, young man,' she went on to Jia Huan, 'I'll first give you a good hiding myself and then send someone to tell the school about you and see if they can knock a bit of sense into you!
It sets your Cousin Lian's teeth on edge to see you so wanting in self-respect. He'd have disembowelled you by now I shouldn't wonder, if I hadn't kept his hands off you!
Now be off with you!'
'Yes,' said Jia Huan meekly and went off with Felicity. When he had got his money, he took himself off to play with Ying-chun and the girls. And there we must leave him.
While Bao-yu was enjoying himself with Bao-chai, a servant announced that Miss Shi had arrived, and he hurriedly got up to go.
'Wait!' said Bao-chai. 'Let's go and see her together!'
She got down from the kang as she said this, and accompanied him round to Grandmother Jia's apartment.
Shi Xiang-yun was already there, laughing and chattering away nineteen to the dozen, but rose to greet them as they entered.
Dai-yu was there too. 'Where have you been?' she asked Bao-yu.
'Bao-chai's.'
'I see' (very frostily).
'I thought something must have been detaining you. Otherwise you would have come flying here long since.'
'Is one only allowed to play with you,' said Bao-yu, 'and keep you amused? I just happened to be visiting her. Why should you start making remarks like that?'
'How thoroughly disagreeable you are!' said Dai-yu.
'What do I care whether you go to see her or not?
And I'm sure I never asked to be kept amused.
From now on you can ignore me completely, as far as I'm concerned.'
With that she went back to her own room in a temper.
Bao-yu came running after. 'What on earth are you upset about this time?
Even if I've said anything wrong, you ought, out of simple courtesy, to sit and talk with the others for a bit!'
'Are you telling me how to behave?'
'Of course not. It's just that you destroy your health by carrying on in this way.'
'That's my affair. If I choose to die, I don't see that it's any concern of yours.'
'Oh, really, really!
Here we are in the middle of the New Year holiday, and you have to start talking about death!'
I'll talk about death if I like, Death! Death! Death!
I'm going to die this minute.
If you're so afraid of death, I wish you long life. A hundred years, will that satisfy you?'
'Do you think I'm afraid of dying when all you will do is quarrel?
I wish I were dead. It would be a relief.'
'Exactly!' said Dai-yu. 'If I were to die, it would be a relief from all this quarrelling!'
'I said if I were to die,' said Bao-yu. 'Don't twist my words. It isn't fair.'
Just then Bao-chai came hurrying in. 'Cousin Shi's waiting for you!'
She took hold of Bao-yu's hand and pulled him after her, to the great mortification of Dai-yu, who sat with her face to the window and shed tears of pure rage.
After about as long as it would take to drink two cups of tea, Bao-yu came back again.
During his absence Dai-yu's sobs seemed to have redoubled in intensity.
Seeing the state she was in he realized that it would need careful handling and began turning over in his mind all kinds of soft and soothing things to coax her with.
But before he could get his mouth open, she had anticipated him: 'What have you come for this time?
Why can't you just leave me here to die in peace?
After all, you've got a new playmate now – one who can read and write and compose and laugh and talk to you much better than I can. Oh yes, and drag you off to be amused if there's any danger of your getting upset!
I really can't imagine what you have come back here for!'
'"Old friends are best friends and close kin are kindest,"'said Bao-yu, coming over to where she sat and speaking very quietly. 'You're too intelligent not to know that.
Even a simpleton like me knows that much!
Take kinship first: you are my cousin on Father's side; Cousin Bao is only a mother-cousin. That makes you much the closer kin.
And as for length of acquaintance: it was you who came here first. You and I have practically grown up together – eaten at the same table, even slept in the same bed. Compared with you she's practially a new arrival. Why should I ever be any less close to you because of her?'
'Whatever do you take me for? Do you think I want you to be any less close to her because of me?
It's the way I feel that makes me the way I am.'
'And it's the way I feel,' said Bao-yu, 'that makes me the way I am!
Do you mean to tell me that you know your own feelings about me but still don't know what my feelings are about you?'
Dai-yu lowered her head and made no reply. After a pause she said: 'You complain that whatever you do people are always getting angry with you. You don't seem to realize how much you provoke them by what you do.
Take today, for instance. It's obviously colder today than it was yesterday. Then why of all days should you choose today to leave your blue cape off?'
Bao-yu laughed. 'I didn't. I was wearing it this morning the same as usual; but when you started quarrelling just now, I got into such a sweat that I had to take it off.'
'Next thing you'll be catching a cold,' said Dai-yu with a sigh, 'and then Heaven knows what grumblings and scoldings there will be!'
Just then Xiang-yun burst in on them and reproved them smilingly for abandoning her: 'Couthin Bao, Couthin Lin: you can thee each other every day. It'th not often I get a chanthe to come here; yet now I have come, you both ignore me!'
Dai-yu burst out laughing: 'Lisping doesn't seem to make you any less talkative! Listen to you: "Couthin!" "Couthin!"
Presently, when you're playing Racing Go, you'll be all "thicktheth" and "theventh" !'
'You'd better not imitate her,' said Bao-yu. 'It'll get to be a habit. You'll be lisping yourself before you know where you are.'
'How you do pick on one!' said Xiang-yun. 'Always finding fault.
Even if you are tho perfect yourthelf, I don't thee why you have to go making fun of everyone elthe.
But I can show you thomeone you won't dare to find fault with. I shall certainly think you a wonder if you do.'
'Who's that?' said Dai-yu.
'If you can find any shortcomings in Cousin Bao-chai', said Xiang-yun, 'you must be very good indeed.'
'Oh her,' said Dai-yu coldly. 'I wondered whom you could mean.
I should never dare to find fault with her.'
But before she could say any more, Bao-yu cut in and hurriedly changed the subject.
'I shall never be a match for you as long as I live,' Xiang-yun said to Dai-yu with a disarming smile.
'All I can thay ith that I hope you marry a lithping huthband, tho that you have "ithee-withee" "ithee-withee" in your earth every minute of the day.
Ah, Holy Name! I think I can thee that blethed day already before my eyeth!'
Bao-yu could not help laughing; but Xiang-yun had already turned and fled.
If you wish to know the conclusion of this scene, you must read the following chapter.
By the time the thirty-three days' convalescence had ended, not only were Bao-yu's health and strength completely restored, but even the burn-marks on his face had vanished, and he was allowed to move back into the Garden.
It may be recalled that when Bao-yu's sickness was at its height, it had been found necessary to call in Jia Yun with a number of pages under his command to take turns in watching over him. Crimson was there too at that time, having been brought in with the other maids from his apartment.
During those few days she and Jia Yun therefore had ample opportunity of seeing each other, and a certain familiarity began to grow up between them.
Crimson noticed that Jia Yun was often to be seen sporting a handkerchief very much like the one she had lost. She nearly asked him about it, but in the end was too shy.
Then, after the monk's visit, the presence of the menfolk was no longer required and Jia Yun went back to his tree-planting.
Though Crimson could still not dismiss the matter entirely from her mind, she did not ask anyone about it for fear of arousing their suspicions.
A day or two after their return to Green Delights, Crimson was sitting in her room, still brooding over this handkerchief business, when a voice outside the window inquired whether she was in.
Peeping through an eyelet in the casement she recognized Melilot, a little maid who belonged to the same apartment as herself. 'Yes, I'm in,' she said. 'Come inside!'
Little Melilot came bounding in and sat down on the bed with a giggle. 'I'm in luck!' she said.
'I was washing some things in the yard when Bao-yu asked for some tea to be taken round to Miss Lin's for him and Miss Aroma gave me the job of taking it.
When I got there, Miss Lin had just been given some money by Her Old Ladyship and was sharing it out among her maids, so when she saw me she just said "Here you are!" and gave me two big handfuls of it.
I've no idea how much it is. Will you look after it for me, please?'
She undid her handkerchief and poured out a shower of coins.
Crimson carefully counted them for her and put them away in a safe place.
'What's been the matter with you lately?' said Melilot.
'If you ask me, I think you ought to go home for a day or two and call in a doctor. I expect you need some medicine.'
'Silly!' said Crimson.
'I'm perfectly all right. What should I want to go home for?'
'I know what, then,' said Melilot.
'Miss Lin's very weakly. She's always taking medicine. Why don't you ask her to give you some of hers? It would probably do just as well.'
'Oh, nonsense!' said Crimson.
'You can't take other people's medicines just like that!'
'Well, you can't go on in this way,' said Melilot, 'never eating or drinking properly. What will become of you?
'Who cares?' said Crimson.
'The sooner I'm dead the better!'
'You shouldn't say such things,' said Melilot, 'It isn't right.'
'Why not?' said Crimson. 'How do you know what is on my mind?'
Melilot shook her head sympathetically. 'I can't say I really blame you,' she said.
'Things are very difficult here at times.
Take yesterday, for example. Her Old Ladyship said that as Bao-yu was better now and there was to be a thanksgiving for his recovery, all those who had the trouble of nursing him during his illness were to be rewarded according to their grades.
Well now, I can understand the very young ones like me not being included, but why should they leave you out?
I felt really sorry for you when I heard that they'd left you out.
Aroma, of course, you'd expect to get more than anyone else. I don't blame her at all. In fact, I think it's owing to her.
Let's be honest: none of us can compare with Aroma.
I mean, even if she didn't always take so much trouble over everything, no one would want to quarrel about her having a bigger share.
What makes me so angry is that people like Skybright and Mackerel should count as top grade when everyone knows they're only put there to curry favour with Bao-yu.
Doesn't it make you angry?'
'I don't see much point in getting angry,' said Crimson.
'You know what they said about the mile-wide marquee: "Even the longest party must have an end"?
Well, none of us is here for ever, you know.
Another four or five years from now when we've each gone our different ways it won't matter any longer what all the rest of us are doing.'
Little Melilot found this talk of parting and impermanence vaguely affecting and a slight moisture was to be observed about her eyes. She thought shame to cry without good cause, however, and masked her emotion with a smile: 'That's perfectly true.
Only yesterday Bao-yu was going on about all the things he's going to do to his rooms and the clothes he's going to have made and everything, just as if he had a hundred or two years ahead of him with nothing to do but kill time in.'
Crimson laughed scornfully, though whether at Melilot's simplicity or at Bao-yu's improvidence is unclear, since just as she was about to comment, a little maid came running in, so young that her hair was still done up in two little girl's horns. She was carrying some patterns and sheets of paper. 'You're to copy out these two patterns.'
She threw them in Crimson's direction and straightway darted out again.
Crimson shouted after her: 'Who are they for, then?
You might at least finish your message before rushing off.
What are you in such a tearing hurry about? Is someone steaming wheatcakes for you and you're afraid they'll get cold?'
'They're for Mackerel.' The little maid paused long enough to bawl an answer through the window, then picking up her heels, went pounding off, plim-plam, plim-plam, plim-plam, as fast as she had come.
Crimson threw the patterns crossly to one side and went to hunt in her drawer for a brush to trace them with.
After rummaging for several minutes she had only succeeded in finding a few worn-out ones, too moulted for use. 'Funny!' she said. 'I could have sworn I put a new one in there the other day ...'
She thought a bit, then laughed at herself as she remembered: 'Of course. Oriole took it, the evening before last.'
She turned to Melilot. 'Would you go and get it for me, then?'
'I'm afraid I can't,' said Melilot. 'Miss Aroma's waiting for me to fetch some boxes for her. You'll have to get it yourself.'
'If Aroma's waiting for you, why have you been sitting here gossiping all this time?' said Crimson.
'If I hadn't asked you to go and get it, she wouldn't have been waiting, would she?
Lazy little beast!'
She left the room and walked out of the gate of Green Delights and in the direction of Bao-chai's courtyard.
She was just passing by Drenched Blossoms Pavilion when she caught sight of Bao-yu's old wet-nurse, Nannie Li, coming from the opposite direction and stood respectfully aside to wait for her. 'Where have you been, Mrs Li?' she asked her.
'I didn't expect to see you here.'
Nannie Li made a flapping gesture with her hand: 'What do you think, my dear: His Nibs has taken a fancy to the young fellow who does the tree-planting — "Yin" or "Yun" or whatever his name is — so Nannie has to go and ask him in.
Let's hope Their Ladyships don't find out about it. There'll be trouble if they do.'
'Are you really going to ask him in?'
'Yes. Why?'
Crimson laughed: 'If your Mr Yun knows what's good for him, he won't agree to come.'
'He's no fool,' said Nannie Li. 'Why shouldn't he?'
'Any way, if he does come in,' said Crimson, ignoring her question, 'you can't just bring him in and then leave him, Mrs Li. You'll have to take him back again yourself afterwards. You don't want him wandering off on his own. There's no knowing who he might bump into.'
'Gracious me! I haven't got that much spare time,' said Nannie Li.
'All I've done is just to tell him that he's got to come. I'll send someone else to fetch him in when I get back presently - one of the girls, or one of the older women, maybe.'
She hobbled off on her stick, leaving Crimson standing there in a muse, her mission to fetch the tracing-brush momentarily forgotten.
She was still standing there a minute or two later when a little maid came along, who, seeing that it was Crimson, asked her what she was doing there.
Crimson looked up. It was Trinket, another of the maids from Green Delights.
'Where are you going?' Crimson asked her.
'I've been sent to fetch Mr Yun,' said Trinket.
She ran off on her way.
At the gate to Wasp Waist Bridge Crimson ran into Trinket again, this time with Jia Yun in tow.
His eyes sought Crimson's; and hers, as she made pretence of conversing with Trinket, sought his. Their two pairs of eyes met and briefly skirmished; then Crimson felt herself blushing, and turning away abruptly, she made off for Allspice Court.
Our narrative now follows Jia Yun and Trinket along the winding pathway to the House of Green Delights. Soon they were at the courtyard gate and Jia Yun waited outside while she went in to announce his arrival. She returned presently to lead him inside.
There were a few scattered rocks in the courtyard and some clumps of jade-green plantain. Two storks stood in the shadow of a pine-tree, preening themselves with their long bills.
The gallery surrounding the courtyard was hung with cages of unusual design in which perched or fluttered a wide variety of birds, some of them gay-plumaged exotic ones.
Above the steps was a little five-frame penthouse building with a glimpse of delicately-carved partitions visible through the open doorway, above which a horizontal board hung, inscribed with the words CRIMSON JOYS AND GREEN DELIGHTS
'So that's why it's called "The House of Green Delights"' Jia Yun told himself. 'The name is taken from the inscription.'
A laughing voice addressed him from behind one of the silk gauze casements: 'Come on in!
It must be two or three months since I first forgot our appointment!'
Jia Yun recognized the voice as Bao-yu's and hurried up the steps inside. He looked about him, dazzled by the brilliance of gold and semi-precious inlay-work and the richness of the ornaments and furnishings, but unable to see Bao-yu in the midst of it all.
To the left of him was a full-length mirror from behind which two girls now emerged, both about fifteen or sixteen years old and of much the same build and height. They addressed him by name and asked him to come inside.
Slightly overawed, he muttered something in reply and hurried after them, not daring to take more than a furtive glance at them from the corner of his eye.
They ushered him into a tent-like summer 'cabinet' of green net, whose principal furniture was a tiny lacquered bed with crimson hangings heavily patterned in gold.
On this Bao-yu, wearing everyday clothes and a pair of bedroom slippers, was reclining, book in hand. He threw the book down as Jia Yun entered and rose to his feet with a welcoming smile.
Jia Yun swiftly dropped knee and hand to floor in greeting. Bidden to sit, he modestly placed himself on a bedside chair.
'After I invited you round to my study that day,' said Bao-yu, 'a whole lot of things seemed to happen one after the other, and I'm afraid I quite forgot about your visit.'
Jia Yun returned his smile: 'Let's just say that it wasn't my luck to see you then. But you have been ill since then, Uncle Bao.
Are you quite better now?'
'Quite better, thank you.
I hear you've been very busy these last few days.'
'That's as it should be,' said Jia Yun.
'But I'm glad you are better, Uncle. That's a piece of good fortune for all of us.'
As they chatted, a maid came in with some tea.
Jia Yun was talking to Bao-yu as she approached, but his eyes were on her.
She was tall and rather thin with a long oval face, and she was wearing a rose-pink dress over a closely pleated white satin skirt and a black satin sleeveless jacket over the dress.
In the course of his brief sojourn among them in the early days of Bao-yu's illness, Jia Yun had got by heart the names of most of the principal females of Bao-yu's establishment. He knew at a glance that the maid now serving him tea was Aroma.
He was also aware that she was in some way more important than the other maids and that to be waited on by her in the seated presence of her master was an honour. Jumping hastily to his feet he addressed her with a modest smile: 'You shouldn't pour tea for me, Miss!
I'm not like a visitor here. You should let me pour for myself!'
'Oh do sit down!' said Bao-yu.
'You don't have to be like that in front of the maids!'
'I know,' said Jia Yun. 'But a body-servant! I don't like to presume.'
He sat down, nevertheless, and sipped his tea while Bao-yu made conversation on a number of unimportant topics.
He told him which household kept the best troupe of players, which had the finest gardens, whose maids were the prettiest, who gave the best parties, and who had the best collection of curiosities or the strangest pets.
Jia Yun did his best to keep up with him.
After a while Bao-yu showed signs of flagging, and when Jia Yun, observing what appeared to be fatigue, rose to take his leave, he did not very strongly press him to stay. 'You must come again when you can spare the time,' said Bao-yu, and ordered Trinket to see him out of the Garden.
Once outside the gateway of Green Delights, Jia Yun looked around him on all sides, and having ascertained that there was no one else about, slowed down to a more dawdling pace so that he could ask Trinket a few questions.
Indeed, the little maid was subjected to quite a catechism: How old was she?
What was her name?
What did her father and mother do?
How many years had she been working for his Uncle Bao?
How much pay did she get a month?
How many girls were there working for him altogether?
Trinket seemed to have no objection, however, and answered each question as it came.
'That girl you were talking to on the way in,' he said, 'isn't her name "Crimson"?'
Trinket laughed: 'Yes.
Why do you ask?'
'I heard her asking you about a handkerchief. Only it just so happens that I picked one up.'
Trinket showed interest. 'She's asked me about that handkerchief of hers a number of times.
I told her, I've got better things to do with my time than go looking for people's handkerchiefs.
But when she asked me about it again today, she said that if I could find it for her, she'd give me a reward.
Come to think of it, you were there when she said that, weren't you? It was when we were outside the gate of Allspice Court. So you can bear me out.
Oh Mr Jia, please let me have it if you've picked it up and I'll be able to see what she will give me for it!'
Jia Yun had picked up a silk handkerchief a month previously at the time when his tree-planting activities had just started. He knew that it must have been dropped by one or another of the female inmates of the Garden, but not knowing which, had not so far ventured to do anything about his discovery.
When earlier on he had heard Crimson question Trinket about her loss, he had realized, with a thrill of pleasure, that the handkerchief he had picked up must have been hers.
Trinket's request now gave him just the opening he required. He drew a handkerchief of his own from inside his sleeve and held it up in front of her with a smile: 'I'll give it to you on one condition. If she lets you have this reward you were speaking of; you've got to let me know. No cheating, mind!'
Trinket received the handkerchief with eager assurances that he would be informed of the outcome, and having seen him out of the Garden, went back again to look for Crimson.
Our narrative returns now to Bao-yu. After disposing of Jia Yun, Bao-yu continued to feel extremely lethargic and lay back on the bed with every appearance of being about to doze off to sleep.
Aroma hurried over to him and, sitting on the edge of the bed, roused him with a shake: 'Come on! Surely you are not going to sleep again?
You need some fresh air. Why don't you go outside and walk around for a bit?'
Bao-yu took her by the hand and smiled at her. 'I'd like to go,' he said, 'but I don't want to leave you.'
'Silly!' said Aroma with a laugh. 'Don't say what you don't mean!'
She hoicked him to his feet.
'Well, where am I going to go then?' said Bao-yu.
'I just feel so bored.'
'Never mind where, just go out!' said Aroma.
'If you stay moping indoors like this, you'll get even more bored.'
Bao-yu followed her advice, albeit half-heartedly, and went out into the courtyard. After visiting the cages in the gallery and playing for a bit with the birds, he ambled out of the courtyard into the Garden and along the batik of Drenched Blossoms Stream, pausing for a while to look at the goldfish in the water.
As he did so, a pair of fawns came running like the wind from the hillside opposite.
Bao-yu was puzzled. There seemed to be no reason for their mysterious terror. But just then little Jia Lan came running down the same slope after them, a tiny bow clutched in his hand.
Seeing his uncle ahead of him, he stood politely to attention and greeted him cheerfully: 'Hello, Uncle. I didn't know you were at home. I thought you'd gone out.'
'Mischievous little blighter, aren't you?' said Bao-yu.
'What do you want to go shooting them for, poor little things?'
'I've got no reading to do today,' said Jia Lan, 'and I don't like to hang about doing nothing, so I thought I'd practise my archery and equitation.'
'Goodness! You'd better not waste time jawing, then,' said Bao-yu, and left the young toxophilite to his pursuits.
Moving on, without much thinking where he was going, he came presently to the gate of a courtyard. Denser than feathers on the phoenix' tail The stirred leaves murmured with a pent dragon's moan. The multitudinous bamboos and the board above the gate confirmed that his feet had, without conscious direction, carried him to the Naiad's House.
Of their own accord they now carried him through the gateway and into the courtyard. The House seemed silent and deserted, its bamboo door-blind hanging unrolled to the ground; but as he approached the window, he detected a faint sweetness in the air, traceable to a thin curl of incense smoke which drifted out through the green gauze of the casement.
He pressed his face to the gauze; but before his eyes could distinguish anything, his ear became aware of a long, languorous sigh and the sound of a voice speaking: 'Each day in a drowsy waking dream of love.'
Bao-yu felt a sudden yearning for the speaker.
He could see her now. It was Dai-yu, of course, lying on her bed, stretching herself and yawning luxuriously.
He laughed: 'Why "each day in a drowsy waking dream of love"?' he asked through the window (the words were from his beloved Western Chamber); then going to the doorway he lifted up the door-blind and walked into the room.
Dai-yu realized that she had been caught off her guard. She covered her burning face with her sleeve, and turning over towards the wall, pretended to be asleep.
Bao-yu went over intending to turn her back again, but just at that moment Dai-yu's old wet-nurse came hurrying in with two other old women at her heels: 'Miss Lin's asleep, sir. Would you mind coming back again after she's woken up?'
Dai-yu at once turned over and sat up with a laugh: 'Who's asleep?'
The three old women laughed apologetically. 'Sorry, miss. We thought you were asleep.
Nightingale! Come inside now! Your mistress is awake.'
Having shouted for Nightingale, the three guardians of morality retired.
'What do you mean by coming into people's rooms when they're asleep?' said Dai-yu, smiling up at Bao-yu as she sat on the bed's edge patting her hair into shape.
At the sight of those soft cheeks so adorably flushed and the starry eyes a little misted with sleep a wave of emotion passed over him. He sank into a chair and smiled back at her: 'What was that you were saying just now before I came in?'
'I didn't say anything,' said Dai-yu.
Bao-yu laughed and snapped his fingers at her: 'Put that on your tongue, girl!
I heard you say it.'
While they were talking to one another, Nightingale came in. 'Nightingale,' said Bao-yu, 'what about a cup of that excellent tea of yours?'
'Excellent tea?' said Nightingale. 'There's nothing very special about the tea we drink here.
If nothing but the best will do, you'd better wait for Aroma to come.'
'Never mind about him!' said Dai-yu.
'First go and get me some water!'
'He is our guest,' said Nightingale. 'I can't fetch you any water until I've given him his tea.'
And she went to pour him a cup.
'Good girl!' said Bao-yu.
'If with your amorous mistress I should wed, 'Tis you, sweet maid, must make our bridal bed.'
Dai-yu was dreadfully offended by them. In an instant the smile had vanished from her face. 'What was that you said?'
He laughed: 'I didn't say anything.'
Dai-yu began to cry. 'This is your latest amusement, I suppose. Every time you hear some coarse expression outside or read some crude, disgusting book, you have to come back here and give me the benefit of it.
I am to become a source of entertainment for the menfolk now, it seems.'
She rose, weeping, from the bed and went outside.
Bao-yu followed her in alarm. 'Dearest coz, it was very wrong of me to say that, but it just slipped out without thinking. Please don't go and tell!
I promise never to say anything like that again. May my mouth rot and my tongue decay if I do!'
Just at that moment Aroma came hurrying up: 'Quick!' she said. 'You must come back and change. The Master wants to see you.'
The descent of this thunderbolt drove all else from his mind and he rushed off in a panic. As soon as he had changed, he hurried out of the Garden. Tealeaf was waiting for him outside the inner gate.
'I suppose you don't know what he wants to see me about?' Bao-yu asked him.
'I should hurry up, if I were you,' said Tealeaf. 'All I know is that he wants to see you. You'll find out why soon enough when you get there.'
He hustled him along as he spoke.
They had passed round the main hall, Bao-yu still in a state of fluttering apprehensiveness when there was a loud guffaw from a corner of the wall. It was Xue Pan, clapping his hands and stamping his feet in mirth. 'Ho! Ho! Ho! You'd never have come this quickly if you hadn't been told that Uncle wanted you!'
Tealeaf, also laughing, fell on his knees.
Bao-yu stood there looking puzzled. It was some moments before it dawned on him that he had been hoaxed.
Xue Pan was by this time being apologetic — bowing repeatedly and pumping his hands to show how sorry he was: 'Don't blame the lad!' he said. 'It wasn't his fault. I talked him into it.'
Bao-yu saw that he could do nothing, and might as well accept with a good grace. 'I don't mind being made a fool of,' he said, 'but I think it was going a bit far to bring my father into it.
I think perhaps I'd better tell Aunt Xue and see what she thinks about it all.'
'Now look here, old chap,' said Xue Pan, getting agitated, 'it was only because I wanted to fetch you out a bit quicker. I admit it was very wrong of me to make free with your Parent, but after all, you've only got to mention my father next time you want to fool me and we'll be quits!'
'Aiyo!' said Bao-yu.
'Worse and worse!'
He turned to Tealeaf: 'Treacherous little beast! What are you still kneeling for?'
Tealeaf kotowed and rose to his feet.
'Look,' said Xue Pan. 'I wouldn't have troubled you otherwise, only it's my birthday on the third of next month and old Hu and old Cheng and a couple of the others, I don't know where they got them from but they've given me: a piece of fresh lotus root, ever so crisp and crunchy, as thick as that, look, and as long as that; a huge great melon, look, as big as that; a freshly-caught sturgeon as big as that; and a cypress-smoked Siamese sucking-pig as big as that that came in the tribute from Siam.
Don't you think it was clever of them to get me those things?
Maybe not so much the sturgeon and the sucking-pig. They're just expensive. But where would you go to get a piece of lotus root or a melon like that? However did they get them to grow so big?
I've given some of the stuff to Mother, and while I was about it I sent some round to your grandmother and Auntie Wang, but I've still got a lot left over. I can't eat it all myself: it would be unlucky. But apart from me, the only person I can think of who is worthy to eat a present like this is you.
That's why I came over specially to invite you.
And we're lucky, because we've got a little chap who sings coming round as well. So you and I will be able to sit down and make a day of it, eh? Really enjoy ourselves.'
THE NINTH DAY of the eighth lunar month, 1939. My father, a bandit's offspring who had passed his fifteenth birthday, was joining the forces of Commander Yu Zhan'ao, a man destined to become a legendary hero, to ambush a Japanese convoy on the Jiao-Ping highway.
Grandma, a padded jacket over her shoulders, saw them to the edge of the village.
'Stop here,' Commander Yu ordered her.
She stopped.
'Douguan, mind your foster-dad,' she told my father.
The sight of her large frame and the warm fragrance of her lined jacket chilled him.
He shivered. His stomach growled.
Commander Yu patted him on the head and said, 'Let's go, foster-son.'
Heaven and earth were in turmoil, the view was blurred. By then the soldiers' muffled footsteps had moved far down the road.
Father could still hear them, but a curtain of blue mist obscured the men themselves.
Gripping tightly to Commander Yu's coat, he nearly flew down the path on churning legs.
Grandma receded like a distant shore as the approaching sea of mist grew more tempestuous; holding on to Commander Yu was like clinging to the railing of a boat.
That was how Father rushed towards the uncarved granite marker that would rise above his grave in the bright-red sorghum fields of his hometown.
A bare-assed little boy once led a white billy goat up to the weed-covered grave, and as it grazed in unhurried contentment, the boy pissed furiously on the grave and sang out: 'The sorghum is red – the Japanese are coming – compatriots, get ready – fire your rifles and cannons –'
Someone said that the little goatherd was me, but I don't know.
I had learned to love Northeast Gaomi Township with all my heart, and to hate it with unbridled fury. I didn't realise until I'd grown up that Northeast Gaomi Township is easily the most beautiful and most repulsive, most unusual and most common, most sacred and most corrupt, most heroic and most bastardly, hardest-drinking and hardest-loving place in the world.
The people of my father's generation who lived there ate sorghum out of preference, planting as much of it as they could.
In late autumn, during the eighth lunar month, vast stretches of red sorghum shimmered like a sea of blood. Tall and dense, it reeked of glory; cold and graceful, it promised enchantment; passionate and loving, it was tumultuous.
The autumn winds are cold and bleak, the sun's rays intense. White clouds, full and round, float in the tile-blue sky, casting full round purple shadows onto the sorghum fields below.
Over decades that seem but a moment in time, lines of scarlet figures shuttled among the sorghum stalks to weave a vast human tapestry.
They killed, they looted, and they defended their country in a valiant, stirring ballet that makes us unfilial descendants who now occupy the land pale by comparison. Surrounded by progress, I feel a nagging sense of our species' regression.
After leaving the village, the troops marched down a narrow dirt path, the tramping of their feet merging with the rustling of weeds.
The heavy mist was strangely animated, kaleidoscopic.
Tiny droplets of water pooled into large drops on Father's face, clumps of hair stuck to his forehead.
He was used to the delicate peppermint aroma and the slightly sweet yet pungent odour of ripe sorghum wafting over from the sides of the path – nothing new there.
But as they marched through the heavy mist, his nose detected a new, sickly-sweet odour, neither yellow nor red, blending with the smells of peppermint and sorghum to call up memories hidden deep in his soul.
Six days later, the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the night of the Mid-Autumn Festival.
A bright round moon climbed slowly in the sky above the solemn, silent sorghum fields, bathing the tassels in its light until they shimmered like mercury. Among the chiselled flecks of moonlight Father caught a whiff of the same sickly odour, far stronger than anything you might smell today.
Commander Yu was leading him by the hand through the sorghum, where three hundred fellow villagers, heads pillowed on their arms, were strewn across the ground, their fresh blood turning the black earth into a sticky muck that made walking slow and difficult.
The smell took their breath away. A pack of corpse-eating dogs sat in the field staring at Father and Commander Yu with glinting eyes.
Commander Yu drew his pistol and fired – a pair of eyes was extinguished. Another shot, another pair of eyes gone.
The howling dogs scattered, then sat on their haunches once they were out of range, setting up a deafening chorus of angry barks as they gazed greedily, longingly at the corpses.
The odour grew stronger. 'Jap dogs!' Commander Yu screamed.
'Jap sons of bitches!'
He emptied his pistol, scattering the dogs without a trace.
'Let's go, son,' he said.
The two of them, one old and one young, threaded their way through the sorghum field, guided by the moon's rays.
The odour saturating the field drenched Father's soul and would be his constant companion during the cruel months and years ahead.
Sorghum stems and leaves sizzled fiercely in the mist. The Black Water River, which flowed slowly through the swampy lowland, sang in the spreading mist, now loud, now soft, now far, now near.
As they caught up with the troops, Father heard the tramping of feet and some coarse breathing fore and aft.
The butt of a rifle noisily bumped someone else's.
A foot crushed what sounded like a human bone.
The man in front of Father coughed loudly. It was a familiar cough, calling to mind large ears that turned red with excitement.
Large transparent ears covered with tiny blood vessels were the trademark of Wang Wenyi, a small man whose enlarged head was tucked down between his shoulders.
Father strained and squinted until his gaze bored through the mist: there was Wang Wenyi's head, jerking with each cough.
Father thought back to when Wang was whipped on the parade ground, and how pitiful he had looked.
He had just joined up with Commander Yu. Adjutant Ren ordered the recruits: Right face! Wang Wenyi stomped down joyfully, but where he intended to 'face' was anyone's guess.
Adjutant Ren smacked him across the backside with his whip, forcing a yelp from between his parted lips. Ouch, mother of my children!
The expression on his face could have been a cry, or could have been a laugh.
Some kids sprawled atop the wall hooted gleefully.
Now Commander Yu kicked Wang Wenyi in the backside.
'Who said you could cough?'
'Commander Yu . . .'
Wang Wenyi stifled a cough. 'My throat itches. . . .'
'So what?
If you give away our position, it's your head!'
'Yes, sir,' Wang replied, as another coughing spell erupted.
Father sensed Commander Yu lurching forward to grab Wang Wenyi around the neck with both hands.
Wang wheezed and gasped, but the coughing stopped.
Father also sensed Commander Yu's hands release Wang's neck; he even sensed the purple welts, like ripe grapes, left behind. Aggrieved gratitude filled Wang's deep-blue, frightened eyes.
The troops turned quickly into the sorghum, and Father knew instinctively that they were heading southeast.
The dirt path was the only direct link between the Black Water River and the village.
During the day it had a pale cast; the original black earth, the colour of ebony, had been covered by the passage of countless animals: cloven hoofprints of oxen and goats, semicircular hoofprints of mules, horses, and donkeys; dried road apples left by horses, mules, and donkeys; wormy cow chips; and scattered goat pellets like little black beans.
Father had taken this path so often that later on, as he suffered in the Japanese cinder pit, its image often flashed before his eyes.
He never knew how many sexual comedies my grandma had performed on this dirt path, but I knew.
And he never knew that her naked body, pure as glossy white jade, had lain on the black soil beneath the shadows of sorghum stalks, but I knew.
The surrounding mist grew more sluggish once they were in the sorghum field. The stalks screeched in secret resentment when the men and equipment bumped against them, sending large, mournful beads of water splashing to the ground.
The water was ice-cold, clear and sparkling, and deliciously refreshing. Father looked up, and a large drop fell into his mouth.
As the heavy curtain of mist parted gently, he watched the heads of sorghum stalks bend slowly down.
The tough, pliable leaves, weighted down by the dew, sawed at his clothes and face.
A breeze set the stalks above him rustling briefly; the gurgling of the Black Water River grew louder.
Father had gone swimming so often in the Black Water River that he seemed born to it. Grandma said that the sight of the river excited him more than the sight of his own mother.
At the age of five, he could dive like a duckling, his little pink asshole bobbing above the surface, his feet sticking straight up.
He knew that the muddy riverbed was black and shiny, and as spongy as soft tallow, and that the banks were covered with pale-green reeds and plantain the colour of goose-down; coiling vines and stiff bone grass hugged the muddy ground, which was crisscrossed with the tracks of skittering crabs.
Autumn winds brought cool air, and wild geese flew through the sky heading south, their formation changing from a straight line one minute to a V the next.
When the sorghum turned red, hordes of crabs the size of horse hooves scrambled onto the bank at night to search for food – fresh cow dung and the rotting carcasses of dead animals – among the clumps of river grass.
The sound of the river reminded Father of an autumn night during his childhood, when the foreman of our family business, Arhat Liu, named after Buddhist saints, took him crabbing on the riverbank.
On that grey-purple night a golden breeze followed the course of the river. The sapphire-blue sky was deep and boundless, green-tinted stars shone brightly in the sky: the ladle of Ursa Major (signifying death), the basket of Sagittarius (representing life); Octans, the glass well, missing one of its tiles; the anxious Herd Boy (Altair), about to hang himself; the mournful Weaving Girl (Vega), about to drown herself in the river. . . .
Uncle Arhat had been overseeing the work of the family distillery for decades, and Father scrambled to keep up with him as he would his own grandfather.
The weak light of the kerosene lamp bored a five-yard hole in the darkness.
When water flowed into the halo of light, it was the cordial yellow of an overripe apricot. But cordial for only a fleeting moment, before it flowed on. In the surrounding darkness the water reflected a starry sky.
Father and Uncle Arhat, rain capes over their shoulders, sat around the shaded lamp listening to the low gurgling of the river.
Every so often they heard the excited screech of a fox calling to its mate in the sorghum fields beside the river.
Father and Uncle Arhat sat quietly, listening with rapt respect to the whispered secrets of the land, as the smell of stinking river mud drifted over on the wind. Hordes of crabs attracted by the light skittered towards the lamp, where they formed a shifting, restless cloister.
Father was so eager he nearly sprang to his feet, but Uncle Arhat held him by the shoulders.
'Take it easy!
Greedy eaters never get the hot gruel.'
Holding his excitement in check, Father sat still.
The crabs stopped as soon as they entered the ring of lamplight, and lined up head to tail, blotting out the ground.
A greenish glint issued from their shells, as countless pairs of button eyes popped from deep sockets on little stems.
Mouths hidden beneath sloping faces released frothy strings of brazenly colourful bubbles.
The long fibres on Father's straw rain cape stood up.
'Now!' Uncle Arhat shouted.
Father sprang into action before the shout died out, snatching two corners of the tightly woven net they'd spread on the ground beforehand; they raised it in the air, scooping up a layer of crabs and revealing a clear spot of riverbank beneath them.
Quickly tying the ends together and tossing the net to one side, they rushed back and lifted up another piece of netting with the same speed and skill.
The heavy bundles seemed to hold hundreds, even thousands of crabs.
As Father followed the troops into the sorghum field, he moved sideways, crablike, overshooting the spaces between the stalks and bumping them hard, which caused them to sway and bend violently.
Still gripping tightly to Commander Yu's coat-tail, he was pulled along, his feet barely touching the ground. But he was getting sleepy. His neck felt stiff, his eyes were growing dull and listless, and his only thought was that as long as he could tag along behind Uncle Arhat to the Black Water River he'd never come back empty-handed.
Father ate crab until he was sick of it, and so did Grandma.
But even though they lost their appetite for it, they couldn't bear to throw the uneaten ones away. So Uncle Arhat minced the leftovers and ground them under the bean-curd millstone, then salted the crab paste, which they ate daily, until it finally went bad and became mulch for the poppies.
Apparently Grandma was an opium smoker, but wasn't addicted, which was why she had the complexion of a peach, a sunny disposition, and a clear mind. The crab-nourished poppies grew huge and fleshy, a mixture of pinks, reds, and whites that assailed your nostrils with their fragrance.
The black soil of my hometown, always fertile, was especially productive, and the people who tilled it were especially decent, strong-willed, and ambitious.
The white eels of the Black Water River, like plump sausages with tapered ends, foolishly swallowed every hook in sight.
Uncle Arhat had died the year before on the Jiao-Ping highway.
His corpse, after being hacked to pieces, had been scattered around the area.
As the skin was being stripped from his body, his flesh jumped and quivered, as if he were a huge skinned frog.
Images of that corpse sent shivers up Father's spine.
Then he thought back to a night some seven or eight years earlier, when Grandma, drunk at the time, had stood in the distillery yard beside a pile of sorghum leaves, her arms around Uncle Arhat's shoulders. 'Uncle . . . don't leave,' she pleaded.
'If not for the sake of the monk, stay for the Buddha. If not for the sake of the fish, stay for the water. If not for my sake, stay for little Douguan. You can have me, if you want. . . . You're like my own father. . . .'
Father watched him push her away and swagger into the shed to mix fodder for the two large black mules who, when we opened our distillery, made us the richest family in the village.
Uncle Arhat didn't leave after all. Instead he became our foreman, right up to the day the Japanese confiscated our mules to work on the Jiao-Ping highway.
Now Father and the others could hear long-drawn-out brays from the mules they had left behind in the village.
Wide-eyed with excitement, he could see nothing but the congealed yet nearly transparent mist that surrounded him.
Erect stalks of sorghum formed dense barriers behind a wall of vapour. Each barrier led to another, seemingly endless.
He had no idea how long they'd been in the field, for his mind was focused on the fertile river roaring in the distance, and on his memories. He wondered why they were in such a hurry to squeeze through this packed, dreamy ocean of sorghum.
Suddenly he lost his bearings.
He listened carefully for a sign from the river, and quickly determined that they were heading east-southeast, towards the river.
Once he had a fix on their direction, he understood that they would be setting an ambush for the Japanese, that they would be killing people, just as they had killed the dogs.
By heading east-southeast, they would soon reach the Jiao-Ping highway, which cut through the swampy lowland from north to south and linked the two counties of Jiao and Pingdu.
Japanese and their running dogs, Chinese collaborators, had built the highway with the forced labour of local conscripts.
The sorghum was set in motion by the exhausted troops, whose heads and necks were soaked by the settling dew.
Wang Wenyi was still coughing, even though he'd been the target of Commander Yu's continuing angry outbursts.
Father sensed that the highway was just up ahead, its pale-yellow outline swaying in front of him.
Imperceptibly tiny openings began to appear in the thick curtain of mist, and one dew-soaked ear of sorghum after another stared sadly at Father, who returned their devout gaze.
It dawned on him that they were living spirits: their roots buried in the dark earth, they soaked up the energy of the sun and the essence of the moon; moistened by the rain and dew, they understood the ways of the heavens and the logic of the earth.
The colour of the sorghum suggested that the sun had already turned the obscured horizon a pathetic red.
Then something unexpected occurred. Father heard a shrill whistle, followed by a loud burst from up ahead.
'Who fired his weapon?' Commander Yu bellowed.
'Who's the prick who did it?'
Father heard the bullet pierce the thick mist and pass through sorghum leaves and stalks, lopping off one of the heads.
Everyone held his breath as the bullet screamed through the air and thudded to the ground.
The sweet smell of gunpowder dissipated in the mist.
Wang Wenyi screamed pitifully, 'Commander – my head's gone – Commander – my head's gone –'
Commander Yu froze momentarily, then kicked Wang Wenyi. 'You dumb fuck!' he growled.
'How could you talk without a head?'
Commander Yu left my father standing there and went up to the head of the column.
Wang Wenyi was still howling.
Father pressed forward to catch a glimpse of the strange look on Wang's face.
A dark-blue substance was flowing on his cheek.
Father reached out to touch it; hot and sticky, it smelled a lot like the mud of the Black Water River, but fresher.
It overwhelmed the smell of peppermint and the pungent sweetness of sorghum and awakened in Father's mind a memory that drew ever nearer: like beads, it strung together the mud of the Black Water River, the black earth beneath the sorghum, the eternally living past, and the unstoppable present. There are times when everything on earth spits out the stench of human blood.
'Uncle,' Father said, 'you're wounded.'
'Douguan, is that you? Tell your old uncle if his head's still on his neck.'
'It's there, Uncle, right where it's supposed to be. Except your ear's bleeding.'
Wang Wenyi reached up to touch his ear and pulled back a bloody hand, yelping in alarm. Then he froze as if paralysed. 'Commander, I'm wounded!
I'm wounded!'
Commander Yu came back to Wang, knelt down, and put his hands around Wang's neck. 'Stop screaming or I'll throttle you!'
Wang Wenyi didn't dare make a sound.
'Where were you hit?'
Commander Yu asked him.
'My ear . . .'
Wang was weeping.
Commander Yu took a piece of white cloth from his waistband and tore it in two, then handed it to him. 'Hold this over it, and no more noise. Stay in rank. You can bandage it when we reach the highway.'
Commander Yu turned to Father. 'Douguan,' he barked.
Father answered, and Commander Yu walked off holding him by the hand, followed by the whimpering Wang Wenyi.
The offending discharge had been the result of carelessness by the big fellow they called Mute, who was up front carrying a rake on his shoulder. The rifle slung over his back had gone off when he stumbled.
Mute was one of Commander Yu's old bandit friends, a greenwood hero who had eaten fistcakes in the sorghum fields. One of his legs was shorter than the other – a prenatal injury – and he limped when he walked, but that didn't slow him down. Father was a little afraid of him.
At about dawn, the massive curtain of mist finally lifted, just as Commander Yu and his troops emerged onto the Jiao-Ping highway.
In my hometown, August is the misty season, possibly because there's so much swampy lowland.
Once he stepped onto the highway, Father felt suddenly light and nimble; with extra spring in his step, he let go of Commander Yu's coat.
Wang Wenyi, on the other hand, wore a crestfallen look as he held the cloth to his injured ear.
Commander Yu crudely wrapped it for him, covering up half his head.
Wang gnashed his teeth in pain.
'The heavens have smiled on you,' Commander Yu said.
'My blood's all gone,' Wang whimpered, 'I can't go on!'
'Bullshit!' Commander Yu exclaimed. 'It's no worse than a mosquito bite. You haven't forgotten your three sons, have you?'
Wang hung his head and mumbled, 'No, I haven't forgotten.'
The butt of the long-barrelled fowling piece over his shoulder was the colour of blood.
A flat metal gunpowder pouch rested against his hip.
Remnants of the dissipating mist were scattered throughout the sorghum field.
There were neither animal nor human footprints in the gravel, and the dense walls of sorghum on the deserted highway made the men feel that something ominous was in the air.
Father knew all along that Commander Yu's troops numbered no more than forty – deaf, mute, and crippled included. But when they were quartered in the village, they had stirred things up so much, with chickens squawking and dogs yelping, that you'd have thought it was a garrison command.
Out on the highway, the soldiers huddled so closely together they looked like an inert snake.
Their motley assortment of weapons included shotguns, fowling pieces, ageing Hanyang rifles, plus a cannon that fired scale weights and was carried by two brothers, Fang Six and Fang Seven.
Mute was toting a rake with twenty-six metal tines, as were three other soldiers.
Father still didn't know what an ambush was, and even if he had, he wouldn't have known why anyone would take four rakes to the event.
ON HER SIXTEENTH birthday, my grandma was betrothed by her father to Shan Bianlang, the son of Shan Tingxiu, one of Northeast Gaomi Township's richest men.
As distillery owners, the Shans used cheap sorghum to produce a strong, high-quality white wine that was famous throughout the area.
Northeast Gaomi Township is largely swampy land that is flooded by autumn rains; but since the tall sorghum stalks resist waterlogging, it was planted everywhere and invariably produced a bumper crop.
By using cheap grain to make wine, the Shan family made a very good living, and marrying my grandma off to them was a real feather in Great-Granddad's cap.
Many local families had dreamed of marrying into the Shan family, despite rumours that Shan Bianlang had leprosy.
His father was a wizened little man who sported a scrawny queue on the back of his head, and even though his cupboards overflowed with gold and silver, he wore tattered, dirty clothes, often using a length of rope as a belt.
Grandma's marriage into the Shan family was the will of heaven, implemented on a day when she and some of her playmates, with their tiny bound feet and long pigtails, were playing beside a set of swings. It was Qingming, the day set aside to attend ancestral graves; peach trees were in full red bloom, willows were green, a fine rain was falling, and the girls' faces looked like peach blossoms. It was a day of freedom for them.
That year Grandma was five feet four inches tall and weighed about 130 pounds. She was wearing a cotton print jacket over green satin trousers, with scarlet bands of silk tied around her ankles.
Since it was drizzling, she had put on a pair of embroidered slippers soaked a dozen times in tong oil, which made a squishing sound when she walked.
Her long shiny braids shone, and a heavy silver necklace hung around her neck – Great-Granddad was a silversmith.
Great-Grandma, the daughter of a landlord who had fallen on hard times, knew the importance of bound feet to a girl, and had begun binding her daughter's feet when she was six years old, tightening the bindings every day.
A yard in length, the cloth bindings were wound around all but the big toes until the bones cracked and the toes turned under. The pain was excruciating.
My mother also had bound feet, and just seeing them saddened me so much that I felt compelled to shout: 'Down with feudalism!
Long live liberated feet!'
The results of Grandma's suffering were two three-inch golden lotuses, and by the age of sixteen she had grown into a well-developed beauty. When she walked, swinging her arms freely, her body swayed like a willow in the wind.
Shan Tingxiu, the groom's father, was walking around Great-Granddad's village, dung basket in hand, when he spotted Grandma among the other local flowers.
Three months later, a bridal sedan chair would come to carry her away.
Grandma was lightheaded and dizzy inside the stuffy sedan chair, her view blocked by a red curtain that gave off a pungent mildewy odour.
She reached out to lift it a crack – Great-Granddad had told her not to remove her red veil. A heavy bracelet of twisted silver slid down to her wrist, and as she looked at the coiled-snake design her thoughts grew chaotic and disoriented.
A warm wind rustled the emerald-green stalks of sorghum lining the narrow dirt path.
Doves cooed in the fields.
The delicate powder of petals floated above silvery new ears of waving sorghum.
The curtain, embroidered on the inside with a dragon and a phoenix, had faded after years of use, and there was a large stain in the middle.
Summer was giving way to autumn, and the sunlight outside the sedan chair was brilliant. The bouncing movements of the bearers rocked the chair slowly from side to side; the leather lining of their poles groaned and creaked, the curtain fluttered gently, letting in an occasional ray of sunlight and, from time to time, a whisper of cool air.
Grandma was sweating profusely and her heart was racing as she listened to the rhythmic footsteps and heavy breathing of the bearers. The inside of her skull felt cold one minute, as though filled with shiny pebbles, and hot the next, as though filled with coarse peppers.
After Shan Tingxiu had spotted Grandma, a stream of people came to congratulate Great-Granddad and Great-Grandma.
Grandma pondered what it would be like to mount to the jingle of gold and dismount to the tinkle of silver, but what she truly longed for was a good husband, handsome and well educated, a man who would treat her gently.
As a young maiden, she had embroidered a wedding trousseau and several exquisite pictures for the man who would someday become my granddad.
Eager to marry, she heard innuendos from her girlfriends that the Shan boy was afflicted with leprosy, and her dreams began to evaporate. Yet, when she shared her anxieties with her parents, Great-Granddad hemmed and hawed, while Great-Grandma scolded the girlfriends, accusing them of sour grapes.
Later on, Great-Granddad told her that the well-educated Shan boy had the fair complexion of a young scholar from staying home all the time.
Grandma was confused, not knowing if this was true or not. After all, she thought, her own parents wouldn't lie to her. Maybe her girlfriends had made it all up.
Once again she looked forward to her wedding day.
Grandma longed to lose her anxieties and loneliness in the arms of a strong and noble young man.
Finally, to her relief, her wedding day arrived, and as she was placed inside the sedan chair, carried by four bearers, the horns and woodwinds fore and aft struck up a melancholy tune that brought tears to her eyes.
Off they went, floating along as though riding the clouds or sailing through a mist. Shortly after leaving the village, the lazy musicians stopped playing, while the bearers quickened their pace.
The aroma of sorghum burrowed into her heart.
Full-voiced strange and rare birds sang to her from the fields.
A picture of what she imagined to be the bridegroom slowly took shape from the threads of sunlight filtering into the darkness of the sedan chair.
Painful needle pricks jabbed her heart.
'Old Man in heaven, protect me!'
Her silent prayer made her delicate lips tremble.
A light down adorned her upper lip, and her fair skin was damp.
Every soft word she uttered was swallowed up by the rough walls of the carriage and the heavy curtain before her.
She ripped the tart-smelling veil away from her face and laid it on her knees.
She was following local wedding customs, which dictated that a bride wear three layers of new clothes, top and bottom, no matter how hot the day.
The inside of the sedan chair was badly worn and terribly dirty, like a coffin; it had already embraced countless other brides, now long dead.
The walls were festooned with yellow silk so filthy it oozed grease, and of the five flies caught inside, three buzzed above her head while the other two rested on the curtain before her, rubbing their bright eyes with black stick-like legs.
Succumbing to the oppressiveness in the carriage, Grandma eased one of her bamboo-shoot toes under the curtain and lifted it a crack to sneak a look outside.
She could make out the shapes of the bearers' statuesque legs poking out from under loose black satin trousers and their big, fleshy feet encased in straw sandals.
They raised clouds of dust as they tramped along.
Impatiently trying to conjure up an image of their firm, muscular chests, Grandma raised the toe of her shoe and leaned forward.
She could see the polished purple scholar-tree poles and the bearers' broad shoulders beneath them.
Barriers of sorghum stalks lining the path stood erect and solid in unbroken rows, tightly packed, together sizing one another up with the yet unopened clay-green eyes of grain ears, one indistinguishable from the next, as far as she could see, like a vast river.
The path was so narrow in places it was barely passable, causing the wormy, sappy leaves to brush noisily against the sedan chair.
The men's bodies emitted the sour smell of sweat. Infatuated by the masculine odour, Grandma breathed in deeply – this ancestor of mine must have been nearly bursting with passion.
As the bearers carried their load down the path, their feet left a series of V imprints known as 'tramples' in the dirt, for which satisfied clients usually rewarded them, and which fortified the bearers' pride of profession.
It was unseemly to 'trample' with an uneven cadence or to grip the poles, and the best bearers kept their hands on their hips the whole time, rocking the sedan chair in perfect rhythm with the musicians' haunting tunes, which reminded everyone within earshot of the hidden suffering in whatever pleasures lay ahead.
When the sedan chair reached the plains, the bearers began to get a little sloppy, both to make up time and to torment their passenger.
Some brides were bounced around so violently they vomited from motion sickness, soiling their clothing and slippers; the retching sounds from inside the carriage pleased the bearers as though they were giving vent to their own miseries.
The sacrifices these strong young men made to carry their cargo into bridal chambers must have embittered them, which was why it seemed so natural to torment the brides.
One of the four men bearing Grandma's sedan chair that day would eventually become my granddad – it was Commander Yu Zhan'ao.
At the time he was a beefy twenty-year-old, a pallbearer and sedan bearer at the peak of his trade.
The young men of his generation were as sturdy as Northeast Gaomi sorghum, which is more than can be said about us weaklings who succeeded them.
It was a custom back then for sedan bearers to tease the bride while trundling her along: like distillery workers, who drink the wine they make, since it is their due, these men torment all who ride in their sedan chairs – even the wife of the Lord of Heaven if she should be a passenger.
Sorghum leaves scraped the sedan chair mercilessly when, all of a sudden, the deadening monotony of the trip was broken by the plaintive sounds of weeping – remarkably like the musicians' tunes – coming from deep in the field.
As Grandma listened to the music, trying to picture the instruments in the musicians' hands, she raised the curtain with her foot until she could see the sweat-soaked waist of one of the bearers. Her gaze was caught by her own red embroidered slippers, with their tapered slimness and cheerless beauty, ringed by halos of incoming sunlight until they looked like lotus blossoms, or, even more, like tiny goldfish that had settled to the bottom of a bowl.
Two teardrops as transparently pink as immature grains of sorghum wetted Grandma's eyelashes and slipped down her cheeks to the corners of her mouth.
As she was gripped by sadness, the image of a learned and refined husband, handsome in his high-topped hat and wide sash, like a player on the stage, blurred and finally vanished, replaced by the horrifying picture of Shan Bianlang's face, his leprous mouth covered with rotting tumours. Her heart turned to ice.
Were these tapered golden lotuses, a face as fresh as peaches and apricots, gentility of a thousand kinds, and ten thousand varieties of elegance all reserved for the pleasure of a leper?
Better to die and be done with it.
The disconsolate weeping in the sorghum field was dotted with words, like knots in a piece of wood:
A blue sky yo – a sapphire sky yo – a painted sky yo – a mighty cudgel yo – dear elder brother yo – death has claimed you – you have brought down little sister's sky yo –.
I must tell you that the weeping of women from Northeast Gaomi Township makes beautiful music.
During 1912, the first year of the Republic, professional mourners known as 'wailers' came from Qufu, the home of Confucius, to study local weeping techniques.
Meeting up with a woman lamenting the death of her husband seemed to Grandma to be a stroke of bad luck on her wedding day, and she grew even more dejected.
Just then one of the bearers spoke up: 'You there, little bride in the chair, say something!
The long journey has bored us to tears.'
Grandma quickly snatched up her red veil and covered her face, gently drawing her foot back from beneath the curtain and returning the carriage to darkness.
'Sing us a song while we bear you along!'
The musicians, as though snapping out of a trance, struck up their instruments. A trumpet blared from behind the chair:
'Too-tah – too-tah –'
'Poo-pah – poo-pah –'
One of the bearers up front imitated the trumpet sound, evoking coarse, raucous laughter all around.
Grandma was drenched with sweat.
Back home, as she was being lifted into the sedan chair, Great-Grandma had exhorted her not to get drawn into any banter with the bearers.
Sedan bearers and musicians are low-class rowdies capable of anything, no matter how depraved.
They began rocking the chair so violently that poor Grandma couldn't keep her seat without holding on tight.
'No answer?
Okay, rock!
If we can't shake any words loose, we can at least shake the piss out of her!'
The sedan chair was like a dinghy tossed about by the waves, and Grandma held on to the wooden seat for dear life. The two eggs she'd eaten for breakfast churned in her stomach, the flies buzzed around her ears; her throat tightened, as the taste of eggs surged up into her mouth. She bit her lip.
Don't throw up, don't let yourself throw up! she commanded herself. You mustn't let yourself throw up, Fenglian. They say throwing up in the bridal chair means a lifetime of bad luck. . . .
The bearers' banter turned coarse. One of them reviled my great-granddad for being a money-grabber, another said something about a pretty flower stuck into a pile of cowshit, a third called Shan Bianlang a scruffy leper who oozed pus and excreted yellow fluids.
He said the stench of rotten flesh drifted beyond the Shan compound, which swarmed with horseflies. . . .
'Little bride, if you let Shan Bianlang touch you, your skin will rot away!'
As the horns and woodwinds blared and tooted, the taste of eggs grew stronger, forcing Grandma to bite down hard on her lip. But to no avail. She opened her mouth and spewed a stream of filth, soiling the curtain, towards which the five flies dashed as though shot from a gun.
'Puke-ah, puke-ah. Keep rocking!' one of the bearers roared. 'Keep rocking. Sooner or later she'll have to say something.'
'Elder brothers . . . spare me . . .'
Grandma pleaded desperately between agonising retches. Then she burst into tears.
She felt humiliated; she could sense the perils of her future, knowing she'd spend the rest of her life drowning in a sea of bitterness.
Oh, Father, oh, Mother. I have been destroyed by a miserly father and a heartless mother!
Grandma's piteous wails made the sorghum quake. The bearers stopped rocking the chair and calmed the raging sea. The musicians lowered the instruments from their rousing lips, so that only Grandma's sobs could be heard, alone with the mournful strains of a single woodwind, whose weeping sounds were more enchanting than any woman's.
Grandma stopped crying at the sound of the woodwind, as though commanded from on high.
Her face, suddenly old and desiccated, was pearled with tears. She heard the sound of death in the gentle melancholy of the tune, and smelled its breath; she could see the angel of death, with lips as scarlet as sorghum and a smiling face the colour of golden corn.
The bearers fell silent and their footsteps grew heavy.
The sacrificial choking sounds from inside the chair and the woodwind accompaniment had made them restless and uneasy, had set their souls adrift.
No longer did it seem like a wedding procession as they negotiated the dirt road; it was more like a funeral procession.
My grandfather, the bearer directly in front of Grandma's foot, felt a strange premonition blazing inside him and illuminating the path his life would take.
The sounds of Grandma's weeping had awakened seeds of affection that had lain dormant deep in his heart.
It was time to rest, so the bearers lowered the sedan chair to the ground.
Grandma, having cried herself into a daze, didn't realise that one of her tiny feet was peeking out from beneath the curtain; the sight of that incomparably delicate, lovely thing nearly drove the souls out of the bearers' bodies.
Yu Zhan'ao walked up, leaned over, and gently – very gently – held Grandma's foot in his hand, as though it were a fledgling whose feathers weren't yet dry, then eased it back inside the carriage.
She was so moved by the gentleness of the deed she could barely keep from throwing back the curtain to see what sort of man this bearer was, with his large, warm, youthful hand.
I've always believed that marriages are made in heaven and that people fated to be together are connected by an invisible thread.
The act of grasping Grandma's foot triggered a powerful drive in Yu Zhan'ao to forge a new life for himself, and constituted the turning point in his life – and the turning point in hers as well.
The sedan chair set out again as a trumpet blast rent the air, then drifted off into obscurity.
The wind had risen – a northeaster – and clouds were gathering in the sky, blotting out the sun and throwing the carriage into darkness.
Grandma could hear the shh-shh of rustling sorghum, one wave close upon another, carrying the sound off into the distance.
Thunder rumbled off to the northeast.
The bearers quickened their pace.
She wondered how much farther it was to the Shan household; like a trussed lamb being led to slaughter, she grew calmer with each step.
At home she had hidden a pair of scissors in her bodice, perhaps to use on Shan Bianlang, perhaps to use on herself.
The holdup of Grandma's sedan chair by a highwayman at Toad Hollow occupies an important place in the saga of my family.
Toad Hollow is a large marshy stretch in the vast flatland where the soil is especially fertile, the water especially plentiful, and the sorghum especially dense.
A blood-red bolt of lightning streaked across the northeastern sky, and screaming fragments of apricot-yellow sunlight tore through the dense clouds above the dirt road, when Grandma's sedan chair reached that point.
The panting bearers were drenched with sweat as they entered Toad Hollow, over which the air hung heavily. Sorghum plants lining the road shone like ebony, dense and impenetrable; weeds and wildflowers grew in such profusion they seemed to block the road.
Everywhere you looked, narrow stems of cornflowers were bosomed by clumps of rank weeds, their purple, blue, pink, and white flowers waving proudly.
From deep in the sorghum came the melancholy croaks of toads, the dreary chirps of grasshoppers, and the plaintive howls of foxes.
Grandma, still seated in the carriage, felt a sudden breath of cold air that raised tiny goosebumps on her skin.
She didn't know what was happening, even when she heard the shout up ahead:
'Nobody passes without paying a toll!'
Grandma gasped. What was she feeling? Sadness? Joy? My God, she thought, it's a man who eats fistcakes!
Northeast Gaomi Township was aswarm with bandits who operated in the sorghum fields like fish in water, forming gangs to rob, pillage, and kidnap, yet balancing their evil deeds with charitable ones.
If they were hungry, they snatched two people, keeping one and sending the other into the village to demand flatbreads with eggs and green onions rolled inside.
Since they stuffed the rolled flatbreads into their mouths with both fists, they were called 'fistcakes'.
'Nobody passes without paying a toll!' the man bellowed.
The bearers stopped in their tracks and stared dumbstruck at the highwayman of medium height who stood in the road, his legs akimbo. He had smeared his face black and was wearing a conical rain hat woven of sorghum stalks and a broad-shouldered rain cape open in front to reveal a black buttoned jacket and a wide leather belt, in which a protruding object was tucked, bundled in red satin.
His hand rested on it.
The thought flashed through Grandma's mind that there was nothing to be afraid of: if death couldn't frighten her, nothing could.
She raised the curtain to get a glimpse of the man who ate fistcakes.
'Hand over the toll, or I'll pop you all!'
He patted the red bundle.
The musicians reached into their belts, took out the strings of copper coins Great-Granddad had given them, and tossed these at the man's feet.
The bearers lowered the sedan chair to the ground, took out their copper coins, and did the same.
As he dragged the strings of coins into a pile with his foot, his eyes were fixed on Grandma.
'Get behind the sedan chair, all of you. I'll pop if you don't!'
He thumped the object tucked into his belt.
The bearers moved slowly behind the sedan chair.
Yu Zhan'ao, bringing up the rear, spun around and glared.
A change came over the highwayman's face, and he gripped the object at his belt tightly. 'Eyes straight ahead if you want to keep breathing!'
With his hand resting on his belt, he shuffled up to the sedan chair, reached out, and pinched Grandma's foot.
A smile creased her face, and the man pulled his hand away as though it had been scalded.
'Climb down and come with me!' he ordered her.
Grandma sat without moving, the smile frozen on her face.
'Climb down, I said!'
She rose from the seat, stepped grandly onto the pole, and alit in a tuft of cornflowers.
Her gaze travelled from the man to the bearers and musicians.
'Into the sorghum field!' the highwayman said, his hand still resting on the red-bundled object at his belt.
Grandma stood confidently; lightning crackled in the clouds overhead and shattered her radiant smile into a million shifting shards.
The highwayman began pushing her into the sorghum field, his hand never leaving the object at his belt.
She stared at Yu Zhan'ao with a feverish look in her eyes.
Yu Zhan'ao approached the highwayman, his thin lips curled resolutely, up at one end and down at the other.
'Hold it right there!' the highwayman commanded feebly. 'I'll shoot if you take another step!'
Yu Zhan'ao walked calmly up to the man, who began backing up.
Green flames seemed to shoot from his eyes, and crystalline beads of sweat scurried down his terrified face.
When Yu Zhan'ao had drawn to within three paces of him, a shameful sound burst from his mouth, and he turned and ran.
Yu Zhan'ao was on his tail in a flash, kicking him expertly in the rear.
He sailed through the air over the cornflowers, thrashing his arms and legs like an innocent babe, until he landed in the sorghum field.
'Spare me, gentlemen!
I've got an eighty-year-old mother at home, and this is the only way I can make a living.'
The highwayman skilfully pleaded his case to Yu Zhan'ao, who grabbed him by the scruff of the neck, dragged him back to the sedan chair, threw him roughly to the ground, and kicked him in his noisy mouth.
The man shrieked in pain; blood trickled from his nose.
Yu Zhan'ao reached down, took the thing from the man's belt, and shook off the red cloth covering, to reveal the gnarled knot of a tree. The men all gasped in amazement.
The bandit crawled to his knees, knocking his head on the ground and pleading for his life.
'Every highwayman says he's got an eighty-year-old mother at home,' Yu Zhan'ao said as he stepped aside and glanced at his comrades, like the leader of a pack sizing up the other dogs.
With a flurry of shouts, the bearers and musicians fell upon the highwayman, fists and feet flying.
The initial onslaught was met by screams and shrill cries, which soon died out.
Grandma stood beside the road listening to the dull cacophony of fists and feet on flesh; she glanced at Yu Zhan'ao, then looked up at the lightning-streaked sky, the radiant, golden, noble smile still frozen on her face.
One of the musicians raised his trumpet and brought it down hard on the highwayman's skull, burying the curved edge so deeply he had to strain to free it.
The highwayman's stomach gurgled and his body, racked by spasms, grew deathly still; he lay spread-eagled on the ground, a mixture of white and yellow liquid seeping slowly out of the fissure in his skull.
'Is he dead?' asked the musician, who was examining the bent mouth of his trumpet.
'He's gone, the poor bastard. He didn't put up much of a fight!'
The gloomy faces of the bearers and musicians revealed their anxieties.
Yu Zhan'ao looked wordlessly first at the dead, then at the living.
With a handful of leaves from a sorghum stalk, he cleaned up Grandma's mess in the carriage, then held up the tree knot, wrapped it in the piece of red cloth, and tossed the bundle as far as he could; the gnarled knot broke free in flight and separated from the piece of cloth, which fluttered to the ground in the field like a big red butterfly.
Yu Zhan'ao lifted Grandma into the sedan chair. 'It's starting to rain,' he said, 'so let's get going.'
Grandma ripped the curtain from the front of the carriage and stuffed it behind the seat. As she breathed the free air she studied Yu Zhan'ao's broad shoulders and narrow waist.
He was so near she could have touched the pale, taut skin of his shaved head with her toe.
The winds were picking up, bending the sorghum stalks in ever deeper waves, those on the roadside stretching out to bow their respects to Grandma.
The bearers streaked down the road, yet the sedan chair was as steady as a skiff skimming across whitecaps.
Frogs and toads croaked in loud welcome to the oncoming summer rainstorm.
The low curtain of heaven stared darkly at the silvery faces of sorghum, over which streaks of blood-red lightning crackled, releasing ear-splitting explosions of thunder.
With growing excitement, Grandma stared fearlessly at the green waves raised by the black winds.
The first truculent raindrops made the plants shudder. The rain beat a loud tattoo on the sedan chair and fell on Grandma's embroidered slippers; it fell on Yu Zhan'ao's head, then slanted in on Grandma's face.
The bearers ran like scared jackrabbits, but couldn't escape the prenoon deluge.
Sorghum crumpled under the wild rain. Toads took refuge under the stalks, their white pouches popping in and out noisily; foxes hid in their darkened dens to watch tiny drops of water splashing down from the sorghum plants.
The rainwater washed Yu Zhan'ao's head so clean and shiny it looked to Grandma like a new moon.
Her clothes, too, were soaked. She could have covered herself with the curtain, but she didn't; she didn't want to, for the open front of the sedan chair afforded her a glimpse of the outside world in all its turbulence and beauty.
FATHER FINISHED HIS fistcake as he stood on the withered grass, turned blood-red by the setting sun. Then he walked gingerly up to the edge of the water.
There on the stone bridge across the Black Water River the lead truck, its tyres flattened by the barrier of linked rakes, crouched in front of the other three. Its railings and fenders were stained by splotches of gore.
The upper half of a Japanese soldier was draped over one of the railings, his steel helmet hanging upturned by a strap from his neck.
Dark blood dripped into it from the tip of his nose.
The water sobbed as it flowed down the riverbed.
Sorghum in the fields sizzled as it matured.
The heavy, dull rays of sunlight were pulverised by tiny ripples on its surface.
Autumn insects hidden in the damp mud beneath the water plants set up a mournful chirping.
The fires were nearly out in the third and fourth trucks; their blackened hulks crackled and split, adding to the discordant symphony.
Father's attention was riveted by the sight and sound of blood dripping from the Japanese soldier's nose into the steel helmet, each drop splashing crisply and sending out rings of concentric circles in the deepening pool.
Father had barely passed his fifteenth birthday.
The sun had nearly set on this ninth day of the eighth lunar month of the year 1939, and the dying embers of its rays cast a red pall over the world below. Father's face, turned unusually gaunt by the fierce daylong battle, was covered by a layer of purplish mud.
He squatted down upriver from the corpse of Wang Wenyi's wife and scooped up some water in his hands; the sticky water oozed through the cracks between his fingers and dropped noiselessly to the ground.
Sharp pains racked his cracked, swollen lips, and the brackish taste of blood seeped between his teeth and slid down his throat, moistening the parched membranes. He experienced a satisfying pain, and even though the taste of blood made his stomach churn, he scooped up handful after handful of water, drinking it down until it soaked up the dry, cracked fistcake in his stomach. He stood up straight and took a deep breath of relief.
Night was definitely about to fall; the ridge of the sky's dome was tinged with the final sliver of red. The scorched smell from the burned-out hulks of the trucks had faded.
A loud bang made Father jump. He looked up, just in time to see exploded bits of truck tyres settling slowly into the river like black butterflies, and countless kernels of Japanese rice – some black, some white – soaring upward, then raining down on the still surface of the river.
As he spun around, his eyes settled on the tiny figure of Wang Wenyi's wife lying at the edge of the river, the blood from her wounds staining the water around her.
He scrambled to the top of the dike and yelled: 'Dad!'
Granddad was standing on the dike, the flesh on his face wasted away by the day's battle, the bones jutting out beneath his dark, weathered skin.
In the dying sunlight Father noticed that Granddad's short-cropped hair was turning white. With fear in his aching heart, Father nudged him timidly. 'Dad,' he said, 'Dad!
What's wrong with you?'
Tears were running down Granddad's face. He was sobbing.
The Japanese machine gun that Detachment Leader Leng had so magnanimously left behind sat at his feet like a crouching wolf, its muzzle gaping.
'Say something, Dad. Eat that fistcake, then drink some water. You'll die if you don't eat or drink.'
Granddad's head drooped until it rested on his chest.
He seemed to lack the strength to support its weight.
He knelt at the top of the dike, holding his head in his hands and sobbing. After a moment, or two, he looked up and cried out: 'Douguan, my son! Is it all over for us?'
Father stared wide-eyed and fearfully at Granddad. The glare in his diamondlike pupils embodied the heroic, unrestrained spirit of Grandma, a flicker of hope that shone and lit up Granddad's heart.
'Dad,' Father said, 'don't give up. I'll work hard on my shooting, like when you shot fish at the inlet to perfect your seven-plum-blossom skill. Then we'll go settle accounts with that rotten son of a bitch Pocky Leng!'
Granddad sprang to his feet and bellowed three times – half wail, half crazed laughter.
A line of dark-purple blood trickled out of the corner of his mouth.
'That's it, son, that's the way to talk!'
He picked up one of Grandma's fistcakes from the dark earth, bit off a chunk, and swallowed it. Cake crumbs and flecks of bubbly blood stuck to his stained teeth.
Father heard Granddad's painful cries as the dry cake stuck in his throat and saw the rough edges make their way down his neck.
'Dad,' Father said, 'go drink some water to soak up the cake in your belly.'
Granddad stumbled along the dike to the river's edge, where he knelt among the water plants and lapped up the water like a draught animal.
When he'd had his fill, he drew his hands back and buried his head in the river, holding it under the water for about half the time it takes to smoke a pipeful of tobacco.
Father started getting nervous as he gazed at his dad, frozen like a bronze frog at the river's edge.
Finally, Granddad jerked his dripping head out of the water and gasped for breath. Then he walked back up the dike to stand in front of Father, whose eyes were glued to the cascading drops of water.
Granddad shook his head, sending forty-nine drops, large and small, flying like so many pearls.
'Douguan,' he said, 'come with Dad. Let's go see the men.'
Granddad staggered down the road, weaving in and out of the sorghum field on the western edge, Father right on his heels.
They stepped on broken, twisted stalks of sorghum and spent cartridges that gave off a faint yellow glint. Frequently they bent down to look at the bodies of their fallen comrades, who lay amid the sorghum, deathly grimaces frozen on their faces.
Granddad and Father shook them in hope of finding one who was alive; but they were dead, all of them.
Father's and Granddad's hands were covered with sticky blood.
Father looked down at two soldiers on the westernmost edge of the field: one lay with the muzzle of his shotgun in his mouth, the back of his neck a gory mess, like a rotten wasps' nest; the other lay across a bayonet buried in his chest.
When Granddad turned them over, Father saw that their legs had been broken and their bellies slit open.
Granddad sighed as he withdrew the shotgun from the one soldier's mouth and pulled the bayonet from the other's chest.
Father followed Granddad across the road, into the sorghum field to the east, which had also been swept by machine-gun fire. They turned over the bodies of more soldiers lying strewn across the ground.
Bugler Liu was on his knees, bugle in hand, as though he were blowing it.
'Bugler Liu!' Granddad called out excitedly.
No response.
Father ran up and nudged him. 'Uncle Liu!' he shouted, as the bugle dropped to the ground. When Father looked more closely, he discovered that the bugler's face was already as hard as a rock.
In the lightly scarred section of field some few dozen paces from the dike, Granddad and Father came upon Fang Seven, whose guts had spilled out of his belly, and another soldier, named Consumptive Four, who, after taking a bullet in the leg, had fainted from blood loss.
Holding his bloodstained hand above the man's mouth, Granddad detected a faint sign of dry, hot breath from his nostrils.
Fang Seven had stuffed his own intestines back into his abdomen and covered the gaping wound with sorghum leaves.
He was still conscious. When he spotted Granddad and Father, his lips twitched and he said haltingly, 'Commander . . . done for . . .
When you see my old lady . . . give some money. . . .
Don't let her remarry. . . .
My brother . . . no sons . . .
If she leaves . . .
Fang family line ended. . . .'
Father knew that Fang Seven had a year-old son, and that there was so much milk in his mother's gourdlike breasts that he was growing up fair and plump.
'I'll carry you back, little brother,' Granddad said.
He bent over and pulled Fang Seven onto his back. As Fang screeched in pain, Father saw the leaves fall away and his white, speckled intestines slither out of his belly, releasing a breath of foul hot air.
Granddad laid him back down on the ground. 'Elder brother,' Fang pleaded, 'put me out of my misery. . . .
Don't torture me. . . .
Shoot me, please. . . .'
Granddad squatted down and held Fang Seven's hand. 'Little brother, I can carry you over to see Zhang Xinyi, Dr Zhang. He'll patch you up.'
'Elder brother . . . do it now. . . .
Don't make me suffer. . . .
Past saving . . .'
Granddad squinted into the murky, late-afternoon August sky, in which a dozen or so stars shone brightly, and let out a long howl before turning to Father. 'Are there bullets in your gun, Douguan?'
'Yes.'
Father handed his pistol to Granddad, who released the safety catch, took another look into the darkening sky, and spun the cylinder.
'Rest easy, brother. As long as Yu Zhan'ao has food to eat, your wife and child will never go hungry.'
Fang Seven nodded and closed his eyes.
Granddad raised the revolver as though he were lifting a huge boulder. The pressure of the moment made him quake.
Fang Seven's eyes snapped open. 'Elder brother . . .'
Granddad spun his face away, and a burst of flame leaped out of the muzzle, lighting up Fang Seven's greenish scalp.
The kneeling man shot forward and fell on top of his own exposed guts.
Father found it hard to believe that a man's belly could hold such a pile of intestines.
'Consumptive Four, you'd better be on your way, too. Then you can get an early start on your next life and come back to seek revenge on those Jap bastards!'
He pumped the last cartridge into the heart of the dying Consumptive Four.
Though killing had become a way of life for Granddad, he dropped his arm to his side and let it hang there like a dead snake; the pistol fell to the ground.
Father bent over and picked it up, stuck it into his belt, and tugged on Granddad, who stood as though drunk or paralysed. 'Let's go home, Dad, let's go home. . . .'
'Home? Go home?
Yes, go home!
Go home . . .'
Father pulled him up onto the dike and began walking awkwardly towards the west.
The cold rays of the half-moon on that August 9 evening filled the sky, falling lightly on the backs of Granddad and Father and illuminating the heavy Black Water River, which was like the great but clumsy Chinese race.
White eels, thrown into a frenzy by the bloody water, writhed and sparkled on the surface.
The blue chill of the water merged with the red warmth of the sorghum bordering the dikes to form an airy, transparent mist that reminded Father of the heavy, spongy fog that had accompanied them as they set out for battle that morning. Only one day, but it seemed like ten years. Yet it also seemed like the blink of an eye.
Father thought back to how his mother had walked him to the edge of the fog-enshrouded village. The scene seemed so far away, though it was right there in front of his eyes.
He recalled how difficult the march through the sorghum field had been, how Wang Wenyi had been wounded in the ear by a stray bullet, how the fifty or so soldiers had approached the bridge looking like the droppings of a goat. Then there was Mute's razor-sharp sabre knife, the sinister eyes, the Jap head sailing through the air, the shrivelled ass of the old Jap officer . . .
Mother soaring to the top of the dike as though on the wings of a phoenix . . . the fistcakes . . . fistcakes rolling on the ground . . . stalks of sorghum falling all around . . . red sorghum crumpling like fallen heroes. . . .
Granddad hoisted Father, who was asleep on his feet, onto his back and wrapped his arms – one healthy, the other injured – around Father's legs.
The pistol in Father's belt banged against Granddad's back, sending sharp pains straight to his heart.
It had belonged to the dark, skinny, handsome, and well-educated Adjutant Ren.
Granddad was thinking about how this pistol had ended the lives of Adjutant Ren, Fang Seven, and Consumptive Four. He wanted nothing more than to heave the execrable thing into the Black Water River.
But it was only a thought. Bending over, he shifted his sleeping son higher up on his back, partly to relieve the excruciating pain in his heart.
All that kept Granddad moving was a powerful drive to push on and continue the bitter struggle against wave after murky wave of obdurate air.
In his dazed state he heard a loud clamour rushing towards him like a tidal wave.
When he raised his head he spotted a long fiery dragon wriggling its way along the top of the dike.
His eyes froze, as the image slipped in and out of focus. When it was blurred he could see the dragon's fangs and claws as it rode the clouds and sailed through the mist, the vigorous motions making its golden scales jangle; wind howled, clouds hissed, lightning flashed, thunder rumbled, the sounds merging to form a masculine wind that swept across a huddled feminine world.
When it was clear he could see it was ninety-nine torches hoisted above the heads of hundreds of people hastening towards him.
The dancing flames lit up the sorghum on both banks of the river.
Granddad lifted Father down off his back and shook him hard. 'Douguan,' he shouted in his ear, 'Douguan!
Wake up!
Wake up!
The villagers are coming for us, they're coming. . . .'
Father heard the hoarseness in Granddad's voice and saw two remarkable tears leap out of his eyes.
GRANDDAD WAS ONLY twenty-four when he murdered Shan Tingxiu and his son.
Even though by then he and Grandma had already done the phoenix dance in the sorghum field, and even though, in the solemn course of suffering and joy, she had conceived my father, whose life was a mixture of achievements and sin (in the final analysis, he gained distinction among his generation of citizens of Northeast Gaomi Township), she had nonetheless been legally married into the Shan family. So she and Granddad were adulterers, their relationship marked by measures of spontaneity, chance, and uncertainty. And since Father wasn't born while they were together, accuracy demands that I refer to Granddad as Yu Zhan'ao in writing about this period.
When, in agony and desperation, Grandma told Yu Zhan'ao that her legal husband, Shan Bianlang, was a leper, he decapitated two sorghum plants with his short sword. Urging her not to worry, he told her to return three days hence. She was too overwhelmed by the tide of passionate love to concern herself with the implications of his comment.
But murderous thoughts had already entered his mind.
He watched her thread her way out of the sorghum field and, through the spaces between stalks, saw her summon her shrewd little donkey and nudge Great-Granddad with her foot, waking the mud-caked heap from his drunken stupor.
He heard Great-Granddad, whose tongue had grown thick in his mouth, say: 'Daughter . . . you . . . what took you so long to take a piss? . . .
Your father-in-law . . . going to give me a big black mule . . .
Ignoring his mumbling, she swung her leg over the donkey's back and turned her face, brushed by the winds of spring, towards the sorghum field south of the road.
She knew that the young sedan bearer was watching her.
Struggling to wrench free of this unknown passion, she had a dim vision of a new and unfamiliar broad road stretching out ahead of her, covered with sorghum seeds as red as rubies, the ditches on either side filled with crystal-clear sorghum wine.
As she moved down the road, her imagination coloured the genuine article until she could not distinguish between reality and illusion.
Yu Zhan'ao followed her with his eyes until she rounded a bend.
Feeling suddenly weary, he pushed his way through the sorghum and returned to the sacred altar, where he collapsed like a toppled wall and fell into a sound sleep.
Later, as the red sun was disappearing in the west, his eyes snapped open, and the first things he saw were sorghum leaves, stems, and ears of grain that formed a thick blanket of purplish red above him.
He draped his rain cape over his shoulders and walked out of the field as a rapid breeze on the road caused the sorghum to rustle noisily.
He wrapped the cape tightly around him to ward off the chill, and as his hand brushed against his belly he realised how hungry he was.
He dimly recalled the three shacks at the head of the village where he had carried the woman in the sedan chair three days ago, and the tattered tavern flag snapping and fluttering in the raging winds of the rainstorm. So hungry he could neither sit still nor stand straight, he strode towards the tavern.
Since he had been hiring out for the Northeast Gaomi Township Wedding and Funeral Service Company for less than two years, the people around here wouldn't recognise him.
He'd get something to eat and drink, find a way to do what he'd come to do, then slip into the sorghum fields, like a fish in the ocean, and swim far away.
At this point in his ruminations, he headed west, where bilious red clouds turned the setting sun into a blooming peony with a luminous, fearfully bright golden border.
After walking west for a while, he turned north, heading straight for the village where Grandma's nominal husband lived.
The fields were still and deserted. During those years, any farmer who had food at home left his field before nightfall, turning the sorghum fields into a haven for bandits.
Village chimneys were smoking by the time he arrived, and a handsome young man was walking down the street with two crocks of fresh well water over his shoulder, the shifting water splashing over the sides.
Yu Zhan'ao darted into the doorway beneath the tattered tavern flag. No inner walls separated the shacks, and a bar made of adobe bricks divided the room in two, the inner half of which was furnished with a brick kang, a stove, and a large vat.
Two rickety tables with scarred tops and a few scattered narrow benches constituted the furnishings in the outer half of the room.
A glazed wine crock rested on the bar, its ladle hanging from the rim.
A fat old man was sprawled on the kang.
Yu Zhan'ao recognised him as the Korean dog butcher they called Gook.
He had seen Gook once at the market in Ma Hamlet. The man could slaughter a dog in less than a minute, and the hundreds of dogs that lived in Ma Hamlet growled viciously when they saw him, their fur standing straight up, though they kept their distance.
WHEN THE JAPANESE troops withdrew, the full moon, thin as a paper cutout, rose in the sky above the tips of the sorghum stalks, which had undergone such suffering. Grain fell sporadically like glistening tears.
A sweet odour grew heavy in the air; the dark soil of the southern edge of our village had been thoroughly soaked by human blood.
Lights from fires in the village curled like foxtails, as occasional pops, like the crackling of dry wood, momentarily filled the air with a charred odour that merged with the stifling stench of blood.
The wound on Granddad's arm had turned worse, the scabs cracking and releasing a rotting, oozing mixture of dark blood and white pus.
He told Father to squeeze the area around the wound.
Fearfully, Father placed his icy fingers on the discoloured skin around the suppurating wound and squeezed, forcing out a string of air bubbles that released the putrid smell of pickled vegetables.
Granddad picked up a piece of yellow spirit currency that had been weighted down by a clod of earth at the head of a nearby gravesite and told Father to smear some of the salty white powder from the sorghum stalks on it.
Then he removed the head of a cartridge with his teeth and poured the greenish gunpowder onto the paper, mixed it with the white sorghum powder, and took a pinch with his fingers to daub on the open wound. 'Dad,' Father said, 'shall I mix some soil into it?'
Granddad thought for a moment. 'Sure, why not?'
Father bent down and picked up a clod of dark earth near the roots of a sorghum stalk, crumbled it in his fingers, and spread it on the paper.
After Granddad mixed the three substances together and covered the wound with them, paper and all, Father wrapped a filthy strip of bandage cloth around it and tied it tight.
'Does that make it feel better, Dad?'
Granddad moved his arm back and forth. 'Much better, Douguan. An elixir like this will work on any wound, no matter how serious.'
'Dad, if we'd had something like that for Mother, she wouldn't have died, would she?'
'No, she wouldn't have. . . .'
Granddad's face clouded.
'Dad, wouldn't it've been great if you'd told me about this before? Mother was bleeding so much I kept packing earth on the wounds, but that only stopped it for a while.
If I'd known to add some white sorghum powder and gunpowder, everything would have been fine. . . .'
All the while Father was rambling, Granddad was loading his pistol. Japanese mortar fire raised puffs of hot yellow smoke all up and down the village wall.
Since Father's Browning pistol lay under the belly of the fallen horse, during the final battle of the afternoon he used a Japanese rifle nearly as tall as he was; Granddad used his German automatic, firing it so rapidly it spent its youth and was ready for the trash heap.
Although battle fires still lit up the sky above the village, an aura of peace and quiet had settled over the sorghum fields.
Father followed Granddad, dragging his rifle behind him as they circled the site of the massacre. The blood-soaked earth had the consistency of liquid clay under the weight of their footsteps; bodies of the dead merged with the wreckage of sorghum stalks.
Moonlight danced on pools of blood, and hideous scenes of dismemberment swept away the final moments of Father's youth.
Tortured moans emerged from the field of sorghum, and here and there among the bodies some movement appeared. Father was burning to ask Granddad to save those fellow villagers who were still alive, but when he saw the pale, expressionless look on his father's bronze face, the words stuck in his throat.
During the most critical moments, Father was always slightly more alert than Granddad, perhaps because he concentrated on surface phenomena; superficial thought seems ideally suited to guerrilla fighting.
At that moment, Granddad looked benumbed; his thoughts were riveted on a single point, which might have been a twisted face, or a shattered rifle, or a single spent bullet.
He was blind to all other sights, deaf to all other sounds.
This problem – or characteristic – of his would grow more pronounced over the coming decade.
He returned to China from the mountains of Hokkaido with an unfathomable depth in his eyes, gazing at things as though he could will them to combust spontaneously.
Father never achieved this degree of philosophical depth.
In 1957, after untold hardships, when he finally emerged from the burrow Mother had dug for him, his eyes had the same look as in his youth: lively, perplexed, capricious.
He never did figure out the relationship between men and politics or society or war, even though he had been spun so violently on the wheel of battle. He was forever trying to squeeze the light of his nature through the chinks in his body armour.
Granddad and Father circled the site of the massacre a dozen times, until Father said tearfully, 'Dad . . . I can't walk any more. . . .'
Granddad's robot movements stopped; taking Father's hand, he backed up ten paces and sat down on a patch of solid, dry earth.
The cheerless and lonely sorghum field was highlighted by the crackle of fires in the village. Weak golden flames danced fitfully beneath the silvery moonlight.
After sitting there for a moment, Granddad fell backward like a capsized wall, and Father laid his head on Granddad's belly, where he fell into a hazy sleep.
He could feel Granddad's feverish hand stroking his head, which sent his thoughts back nearly a dozen years, to when he was suckling at Grandma's breast.
He was four at the time, and growing tired of the yellowed nipple that was always thrust into his mouth.
Having begun to hate its sour hardness, he gazed up into the look of rapture in Grandma's face with a murderous glint in his eyes and bit down as hard as he could.
He felt the contraction in Grandma's breast as her body jerked backward.
Trickles of a sweet liquid warmed the corners of his mouth, until Grandma gave him a swat on the bottom and pushed him away.
He fell to the ground, his eyes on the drops of fresh red blood dripping from the tip of Grandma's pendulous breast. He whimpered, but his eyes were dry.
Grandma, on the other hand, was crying bitterly, her shoulders heaving, her face bathed in tears.
She lashed out at him, calling him a wolf cub, as mean as his wolf of a father.
Later on he learned that that was the year Granddad, who loved Grandma dearly, had fallen in love with the hired girl, Passion, who had grown into a bright-eyed young woman.
At the moment when Father bit Grandma, Granddad, who had grown tired of her jealousy, was living with Passion in a house he'd bought in a neighbouring village.
Everyone said that this second grandma of mine was no economy lantern, and that Grandma was afraid of her, but this is something I'll clear up later. Second Grandma eventually had a girl by Granddad.
In 1938, Japanese soldiers murdered this young aunt of mine with a bayonet, then gang-raped Second Grandma – this, too, I'll clear up later.
Granddad and Father were exhausted. The wound throbbed in Granddad's arm, which seemed to be on fire.
Father's feet had swollen until his cloth shoes nearly split their seams, and he fantasised about the exquisite pleasure of airing the rotting skin of his feet in the moonlight. But he didn't have the strength to sit up and take off his shoes.
Instead, he rolled over and rested his head on Granddad's hard stomach so he could look up into the starry night and let the moon's rays light up his face.
He could hear the murmuring flow of the Black Water River and see black clouds gather in the sky above him.
He remembered Uncle Arhat's saying once that, when the Milky Way lay horizontally across the sky, autumn rains would fall.
He had only really seen autumn water once in his life. The sorghum was ready for harvest when the Black Water River rose and burst its banks, flooding both the fields and the village.
The stalks strained to keep their heads above water; rats and snakes scurried and slithered up them to escape drowning.
Father had gone with Uncle Arhat to the wall, which the villagers were reinforcing, and gazed uneasily at the yellow water rushing towards him.
The villagers made rafts from kindling and paddled out to the fields to hack off the ears of grain, which were already sprouting new green buds.
Bundles of soaked deep-red and emerald-green ears of sorghum weighted down the rafts so much it's a wonder they didn't sink.
The dark, gaunt men, barefoot and bare-chested, wearing conical straw hats, stood with their legs akimbo on the rafts, poling with all their strength as they rocked from side to side.
The water in the village was knee-high, covering the legs of livestock, whose waste floated on the surface.
In the dying rays of the autumn sun, the water shone like liquefied metal; tips of sorghum stalks too far away to be harvested formed a canopy of golden red just above the rippling surface, over which flocks of wild geese flew.
Father could see a bright, broad body of water flowing slowly through the densest patch of red sorghum, in sharp contrast to the muddy, stagnant water around him; it was, he knew, the Black Water River.
On one of the rafts lay a silver-bellied, green-backed grass carp, a long, thin sorghum stalk stuck through its gills.
The farmer proudly held it up to show the people on the wall; it was nearly half as tall as he was. Blood oozed from its gills, and its mouth was open as it looked at my father with dull, sorrowful eyes.
Father was thinking about how Uncle Arhat had bought a fish from a farmer once, and how Grandma had scraped the scales from its belly, then made soup out of it; just thinking about that delicious soup gave him an appetite.
He sat up. 'Dad,' he said, 'aren't you hungry?
I am. Can you find me something to eat? I'm starving. . . .'
Granddad sat up and fished around in his belt until he found a bullet, which he inserted into the cylinder; then he snapped it shut, sending the bullet into the chamber. He pulled the trigger, and there was a loud crack.
'Douguan,' he said, 'let's go find your mother. . . .'
'No, Dad,' Father replied in a high-pitched, frightened voice, 'Mother's dead. But we're still alive, and I'm hungry. Let's get something to eat.'
Father pulled Granddad to his feet.
'Where?' Granddad mumbled.
'Where can we go?'
So Father led him by the hand into the sorghum field, where they walked in a crooked line, as though their objective was the moon, hanging high and icy in the sky.
A growl emerged from the field of corpses.
Granddad and Father stopped in their tracks and turned to see a dozen pairs of green eyes, like will-o'-the-wisps, and several indigo shadows tumbling on the ground.
Granddad took out his pistol and fired at two of the green eyes; the howl of a dying dog accompanied the extinguishing of those eyes.
Granddad fired seven shots in all, and several wounded dogs writhed in agony among the corpses.
While he was emptying his pistol into the pack, the uninjured dogs fled into the sorghum field, out of range, where they howled furiously at the two humans.
The last couple of bullets from Granddad's pistol had travelled only thirty paces or so before thudding to the ground.
Father watched them tumble in the moonlight, so slowly he could have reached out and caught them.
And the once crisp crack of the pistol sounded more like the phlegmatic cough of a doddering old man.
A tortured, sympathetic expression spread across Granddad's face as he looked down at the weapon in his hand.
'Out of bullets, Dad?'
The five hundred bullets they'd brought back from town in the goat's belly had been used up in a matter of hours.
The pistol had aged overnight, and Granddad came to the painful realisation that it was no longer capable of carrying out his wishes; time for them to part ways.
Holding the gun out in front of him, he carefully studied the muted reflection of the moonlight on the barrel, then loosened his grip and let the gun fall heavily to the ground.
The green-eyed dogs returned to the corpses, timidly at first.
But their eyes quickly disappeared, and the moonlight was reflected off rolling waves of bluish fur; Granddad and Father could hear the sounds of dogs tearing human bodies with their fangs.
'Let's go into the village, Dad,' Father said.
Granddad wavered for a moment, so Father tugged on him, and they fell into step.
By then most of the fires in the village had gone out, leaving red-hot cinders that gave off an acrid heat amid the crumbling walls and shattered buildings. Hot winds whirled above the village roads. The murky air was stifling.
Roofs of houses, their supports burned out beneath them, had collapsed in mountains of smoke, dust, and cinders.
Bodies were strewn atop the village wall and on the roads.
A page in the history of our village had been turned.
At one time the site had been a wasteland covered with brambles, underbrush, and reeds, a paradise for foxes and wild rabbits. Then a few huts appeared, and it became a haven for escaped murderers, drunks, gamblers, who built homes, cultivated the land, and turned it into a paradise for humans, forcing out the foxes and wild rabbits, who set up howls of protest on the eve of their departure.
Now the village lay in ruins; man had created it, and man had destroyed it.
It was now a sorrowful paradise, a monument to both grief and joy, built upon ruins.
In 1960, when the dark cloud of famine settled over the Shandong Peninsula, even though I was only four years old I could dimly sense that Northeast Gaomi Township had never been anything but a pile of ruins, and that its people had never been able to rid their hearts of the shattered buildings, nor would they ever be able to.
That night, after the smoke and sparks from the other houses had died out, our buildings were still burning, sending skyward green-tinged tongues of flame and the intoxicating aroma of strong wine, released in an instant after all those years.
Blue roof tiles, deformed by the intense heat, turned scarlet, then leaped into the air through a wall of flames that illuminated Granddad's hair, which had turned three-quarters grey in the space of a week.
A roof came crashing down, momentarily blotting out the flames, which then roared out of the rubble, stronger than ever.
The loud crash nearly crushed the breath out of Father and Granddad.
Our house, which had sheltered the father and son of the Shan family as they grew rich, then had sheltered Granddad after his murderous deed, then had sheltered Grandma, Granddad, Father, Uncle Arhat, and all the men who worked for them, a sanctuary for their kindnesses and their grievances, had now completed its historical mission.
I hated that sanctuary: though it had sheltered decent emotions, it had also sheltered heinous crimes.
Father, when you were hiding in the burrow we dug for you in the floor of my home back in 1957, you recalled those days of your past in the unrelenting darkness. On no fewer than 365 occasions, in your mind you saw the roof of your house crash down amid the flames, and wondered what was going through the mind of your father, my granddad. So my fantasies were chasing yours while yours were chasing Granddad's.
As he watched the roof collapse, Granddad became as angry as he'd been the day he abandoned Grandma and moved to another village to be with his new love, Passion. He had learned then that Grandma had shamelessly taken up with Black Eye, the leader of an organisation called the Iron Society, and at the time he wasn't sure what filled his heart – loathing or love, pain or anger.
When he later returned to Grandma's arms, his feelings for her were so confused he couldn't sort them out.
In the beginning, his emotional warfare scarred only his own heart, and Grandma's scarred only her own. Finally, they hurt each other.
Only when Grandma smiled up at him as she lay dead in the sorghum field did he realise the grievous punishment life had meted out to him.
He loved my father as a magpie loves the last remaining egg in its nest. But by then it was too late, for fate, cold and calculating, had sentenced him to a cruel end that was waiting for him down the road.
'Dad, our house is gone. . . .' Father said.
Granddad rubbed Father's head as he stared at the ruins of his home, then took Father's hand and began stumbling aimlessly down the road under the waning light of the flames and the waxing light of the moon.
At the head of the village they heard an old man's voice: 'Is that you, Number Three?
Why didn't you bring the oxcart?'
The sound of that voice gave Granddad and Father such a warm feeling they forgot how tired they were and rushed over to see who it was.
A hunched-over elderly man rose to greet them, carefully sizing up Granddad with his ancient eyes, nearly touching his face.
Granddad didn't like his watchful look and was repulsed by the greedy stench that came from his mouth.
'You're not my Number Three,' the old man said unhappily, his head wobbling as he sat down on a pile of loot.
There were trunks, cupboards, dining tables, farm tools, harnesses, ripped comforters, cooking pots, earthenware bowls.
He was sitting on a small mountain of stuff and guarding it as a wolf guards its kill.
Behind him, two calves, three goats, and a mule were tied to a willow tree.
'You old dog!' Granddad growled through clenched teeth.
'Get the hell out of here!'
The old man rose up on his haunches and said amiably, 'Ah, my brother, let's not be envious. I risked my life to drag this stuff out of the flames!'
'I'll fuck your living mother! Climb down from there!'
Granddad lashed out angrily.
'You have no right to talk to me like that. I didn't do anything to you. You're the one who's asking for trouble. What gives you the right to curse me like that?' he complained.
'Curse you?
I'll goddamn kill you!
We're not in a desperate struggle with Japan just so you can go on a looting binge!
You bastard, you old bastard!
Douguan, where's your gun?'
'It's under the horse's belly,' Father said.
Granddad jumped up onto the mountain of stuff and, with a single kick, sent the old man sprawling onto the ground.
He rose to his knees and begged, 'Spare me, Eighth Route Master, spare me!'
'I'm not with the Eighth Route Army,' Granddad said, 'or the Ninth Route.
I'm Yu Zhan'ao the bandit!'
'Spare me, Commander Yu, spare me! What good would it do to let all this stuff burn?
I'm not the only "potato picker" from the village. Those thieves got all the good stuff. I'm too old and too slow, and all I could find was this junk.'
Granddad picked up a wooden table and threw it at the old man's bald head.
He screamed and held his bleeding scalp as he rolled in the dirt.
Granddad reached down and picked him up by his collar. Looking straight into those tortured eyes, he said, 'Our hero, the "potato picker", then raised his fist and drove it with a loud crack into the old man's face, sending him crumpling to the ground, face up. Granddad walked up and kicked him in the face, hard.
At twenty-one, I was placed in a production team for reeducation in Yunnan.
That year Chen Qingyang was twenty-six and a doctor who happened to work where I did.
I was on the fourteenth production team down the mountain, and she was on the fifteenth team up the mountain.
One day she came down the mountain to see me, to discuss the fact that she was not damaged goods.
I didn't know her too well at the time, barely you might say.
The issue she wanted to discuss was this: Despite the fact that everyone believed she was damaged goods, she didn't think she was.
Because, to be damaged goods she had to have cheated on her husband, but she never did.
Although her husband had been in prison for a year, she hadn't slept with another man, nor had she ever done anything like that.
Therefore she simply couldn't understand why people kept calling her damaged goods.
If I'd wanted to comfort her, it wouldn't have been hard; I could prove logically that she was not damaged goods.
If Chen Qingyang were damaged goods, she would have had to have cheated on her husband, and therefore, there must be a man with whom she'd cheated.
Since at present no one could point out such a man, the proposition that Chen Qingyang had slept with another man was untenable.
Yet I insisted on saying that Chen Qingyang was damaged goods, and that this was beyond question.
Chen Qingyang came to me to ask me to prove she wasn't damaged goods because I had come to her for a shot.
The whole thing unfolded as follows: During the farm's busy season our team leader would not assign me to plow fields. Instead he made me plant rice seedlings so that I could not stand straight most of the time.
Anyone familiar with me knew about the injury to my lower back, not to mention that I was a tall man, over six feet.
Having worked like this for a month, the pain in my lower back became so intolerable that I couldn't fall asleep without steroid injections.
The clinic at our team had a bunch of needles whose coating had completely peeled off, with tips all bent like fishhooks, which often pulled flesh from my lower back.
After a while my waist looked like it had been peppered by a shotgun, and the scars didn't fade for a long time.
Under the circumstances, I recalled that the doctor at the fifteenth team, Chen Qingyang, had graduated from Beijing Medical School. Maybe she would be able to tell the difference between a hypodermic and a crotchet needle. So I went to see her.
Not half an hour after my visit, she chased after me to my room, wanting me to prove that she wasn't damaged goods.
Chen Qingyang said she didn't look down on damaged goods at all.
In fact, from what she observed, damaged goods seemed to have soft hearts, loved to help others and, most of all, hated to disappoint people.
Therefore, she even had a sneaking admiration for people like them.
However, the problem was not whether damaged goods were good or not good, but lay in the fact that she was not damaged goods at all, just as a cat was not a dog.
If a cat were called a dog, it wouldn't feel comfortable.
Now everyone called her damaged goods, which drove her to distraction and made her almost forget who she was.
As Chen Qingyang sat in my thatched shack and poured out her troubles, she had on a white smock that left her arms and legs exposed, the same outfit she had worn earlier in her clinic.
The only differences were that she had tied back her long, loose hair with a handkerchief and put on a pair of sandals.
As I looked at her, I began to wonder what was under her white smock, whether she had something on—or nothing at all, which would show what a beautiful woman Chen Qingyang was because she believed that it didn't really matter whether or not she wore underwear.
That kind of confidence needs to have been built up from childhood.
I told her that she was definitely damaged goods, and even enumerated several reasons to convince her. I said that so-called damaged goods was just a denotation. If people say you're damaged goods, then you must be damaged goods—there isn't much logic to it; if people say you slept with another man, you must have done it—there is not much logic to that either.
As for why they say you're damaged goods, in my opinion it's because of this: People generally agree that if a married woman hasn't cheated on her husband, her face must be leathery, and her breasts must sag.
Now your face is not dark but fair, your breasts are not hanging down but jutting out, so you must be damaged goods.
If you don't want to be damaged goods, you should try to darken your face and make your breasts sag so people won't accuse you of being damaged goods, which, of course, is a raw deal for you. If you don't want a raw deal, sleep with another man so you can think of yourself as damaged goods, too.
Other people are not obliged to find out if you are damaged goods before calling you that, but you are obliged to stop them from calling you damaged goods.
As Chen Qingyang listened to my words, her face flushed and her eyes widened with anger. She looked like she was about to slap me.
This woman was famous for her slapping; many men had felt her slaps.
However, suddenly disheartened, she said, "All right, let me be damaged goods.
As far as drooping or not drooping, dark or not dark, that's none of your business."
She also said that if I spent too much time pondering these matters, I would very likely get slapped.
Imagine the scene twenty years ago, when Chen Qingyang and I discussed the damaged goods issue.
Back then, my face was baked brown, my lips were dry and chapped, with bits of paper and tobacco stuck to them, my hair was matted like a coconut husk, the many holes in the ragged army greatcoat I wore were patched with bandages, as I sat, legs crossed, on the wooden bed, looking like a total hooligan.
You can imagine when Chen Qingyang heard such a person talking about whether her breasts drooped or not, how the palm of her hand itched.
She was a little oversensitive, but that was because many strong men went to see her who weren't sick at all.
What they wanted to see was damaged goods, not a doctor.
I was the only exception.
My lower back looked like it had been struck by Pigsy's rake.
Whether my back really hurt or not, those holes alone would justify my visit to the doctor.
Those holes also made her hope she might be able to convince me she was not damaged goods.
Even if there were just one person who believed she wasn't damaged goods, it would be very different than no one believing her.
But I intentionally disappointed her.
This is what I thought: if I wanted to prove she was not damaged goods and I could, then things would be too easy.
The truth was I couldn't prove anything, except things that didn't need proving.
In spring, our team leader claimed I was the one who had shot out the left eye of his dog, which was why the dog always looked at people with its head tilted, as if she were dancing ballet.
From then on, he always gave me a hard time.
Three things could have proved my innocence: 1. The team leader had no dog; 2. The dog was born blind in the left eye; 3. I'm a man with no hands who can't aim a gun.
Finally, none of the three requirements could be established: the team leader did have a brown dog; her left eye was indeed blinded by a shot; I could not only aim a gun but was also was an excellent marksman.
To make matters worse, I'd borrowed an air rifle from Luo Xiaosi not long before the incident, and using a bowl of mung beans as bullets, killed a couple of pounds of mice in an empty granary.
Of course, there were other crack shots on our production team, and one of them was Luo Xiaosi.
When he fired at the team leader's dog, I stood right beside him watching.
But I couldn't inform on other people, and my relationship with Luo Xiaosi was not bad.
Besides, if the team leader could have handled Luo Xiaosi, he wouldn't have accused me.
So I kept quiet.
To keep silent meant to acquiesce.
That was why in the spring I had to plant rice seedlings, stooped over in the field like a broken electricity pole; in the autumn I had to herd cattle, so I couldn't get a hot meal.
Of course, I could not take this lying down.
One day as I walked on the mountain, the team leader's dog came into view. I happened to have Luo Xiaosi's air rifle with me, so I fired a bullet and blinded her right eye.
With neither left eye nor right eye, the dog couldn't get back to the team leader's house—God knows where she went.
I remember in those days, besides herding cattle on the mountain and lying in bed, I didn't have anything to do and nothing seemed to matter.
But Chen Qingyang came down the mountain again to see me.
There was another rumor in the air that she was having an affair with me and this time she wanted me to prove our innocence.
I told her that we would have to prove two things first before our innocence could be established: 1. Chen Qingyang was a virgin; 2. Castrated at birth, I was unable to have sex.
These two things would be hard to prove, so we couldn't prove our innocence.
I preferred to prove our guilt.
On hearing my words, Chen Qingyang's face first turned pale and then blushed all over. Finally she stood up and left without saying a word.
Chen Qingyang told me later that I had always been a scoundrel.
The first time she wanted me to prove her innocence, I looked up at the ceiling and began to talk nonsense; the next time she wanted me to prove our innocence, I earnestly suggested having intercourse with her.
So she decided she was going to slap me sooner or later.
If I had guessed her plan at the time, the things that happened later might never have happened.
On my twenty-first birthday, I was herding buffalo at the riverside.
In the afternoon I fell asleep on the grass.
I remembered covering myself with a few banana leaves before I fell asleep, but by the time I woke up I found nothing on my body. (Perhaps the buffalo had eaten the leaves.)
The sunshine in the subtropical dry season had burned my entire body red, leaving me in an agony of burning and itching. My little Buddha pointed to the sky like an arrow, bigger than ever.
That was how I spent my birthday.
When I woke up, the sun glared down on me from a frighteningly blue sky. A layer of fine dust, like a coating of talcum powder, covered my whole body.
I'd experienced numerous erections in my life, but none as vigorous and magnificent as that time. Perhaps it was because of the location, so isolated from the villages that not even a soul could be seen.
I got up to check on my buffalo, only to find them all crouching at the far fork of the rivers, chewing grass quietly.
It was a surpassingly still moment, and the white wind was gently blowing across the field.
On the bank, several pairs of bulls from the mountain village were fighting each other. Their eyes had turned red, and saliva drooled from the corner of their mouths.
This sort of bull had tightly packed balls and protruding penises.
Our bulls were not like that.
They would lie on the ground and stay put no matter how hard the other bulls tried to provoke them.
To prevent our bulls from hurting each other and slowing down the spring plowing, we castrated all of them.
I was present every time they castrated the bulls.
Ordinary bulls could just be cut with a knife.
But for extremely wild ones, you have to employ the art of hammer-smashing, which is to cut open their scrotums, take out the balls, and then use a wooden hammer to pulverize them.
From then on these altered bulls knew nothing but grazing and working. No need to tie them down if you wanted to kill them.
Our team leader, the one who always wielded the hammer, had no doubts that surgery of this kind would also work on humans. He would shout at us all the time: You young bulls! You need a good hammering to make you behave.
In his way of thinking, this red, stiff, foot-long thing on my body was the incarnation of evil.
Of course, I had a different opinion.
To me, the thing was extremely important, as important as my existence itself.
The darkness began to settle in, and a cloud drifted idly across the sky.
The lower half of the cloud was immersed in darkness and the upper half still floated in sunshine.
That day I was twentyone, and in the golden age of my life. I had so many desires; I wanted to love, to eat, and to be turned in a flash into the halfbright and half-dark cloud in the sky.
Only much later did I realize that life is a slow process of being hammered. People grow old day after day, their desire disappears little by little, and finally they become like those hammered bulls.
However, that idea never crossed my mind on my twenty-first birthday.
I thought I would always be lively and strong, and that nothing could beat me.
I had invited Chen Qingyang over to eat fish with me that night, so I was supposed to catch fish in the afternoon.
But not until five o'clock did I remember I needed to go to where the fish were supposed to have been trapped to take a look.
Before I reached the small fork of the rivers, two Jingpo boys ran up, hurling mud at one another all the way. Some landed on me. They stopped fighting only after I picked them up by their ears.
I shouted at them, "You pricks, where're the fish?"
The older one said, "It was all that prick Le Long's fault!
He sat on the dam all the time, so the dam fucking collapsed."
Le Long roared back, "Wang Er, the fucking dam you built wasn't strong enough!"
I said, "That's bullshit!
I built the dam with sod. What prick has the nerve to say it wasn't strong enough?"
I went down to see for myself. Whether Le Long's fault or mine, the dam was gone anyway. The water we bailed out all flowed back, any hope of catching fish went down the drain, and the whole day went to waste.
Of course, I wouldn't admit it was my fault. Instead I yelled at Le Long.
Le Du (the other boy) also chimed in.
Le Long began to get angry. He jumped up a couple of feet and roared, "Wang Er!
Le Du!
You pricks!
You are ganging up on me!
I'm going to tell my father. He'll shoot the two of you with his bronze-barreled shotgun!"
After saying this, the little bastard tried to leap onto the bank to escape.
I caught his ankle and pulled him back.
"You want to run off and leave us to herd your buffalo?
You're fucking dreaming!"
The little bastard wailed wa-wa and tried to bite me. But I grabbed him, pinned him to the ground, and held him hard.
He frothed at the mouth, cursing me in a mix of Mandarin, Jingpo, and Thai. I talked back in standard Beijing dialect.
All of a sudden, he stopped cursing, eyeing the lower part of my body with envy.
I looked down and found my little Buddha standing up again.
I heard Le Long click his tongue admiringly, "Wow!
Want to fuck Le Du's sister?"
I immediately dropped him to put on my pants.
When I lit the gas lamp at the pump house, Chen Qingyang would often arrive unexpectedly and complain that life was meaningless. She also said that she believed she was innocent in every respect.
I said that the way she dared claim innocence was itself the biggest sin.
In my opinion, craving good food and aversion to hard work, together with lust for beauty and sex, make up a human being's basic nature. If you were a hard worker who lived a frugal and chaste life, you would commit the sin of hypocrisy, which was more disgusting than greed, sensuality, or laziness.
Words like this seemed to please her, although she never agreed with what I said out loud.
However, when I lit the gas lamp that night, she didn't show up for a long time. It was not until nine that she appeared at my door and called my name, "Wang Er, you stinker!
Come out!"
I went out to see what was going on. Dressed all in white, she looked especially smart, although her expression seemed tense.
She said, You invited me over to eat fish and have a heart-to-heart, but where is the fish?
I had to admit that the fish were still in the river.
All right, she said, at least we can still have a heart-to-heart.
Then let's talk.
I said, How about we go inside first? She said that's fine, too. So she went in and found herself a place to sit. She looked angry.
I had planned to seduce Chen Qingyang on my twenty-first birthday, because she was my friend; and she had a full bosom, a slender waist, and shapely buttocks; besides, her neck was long and graceful and her face was pretty, too.
I wanted to have sex with her and thought she shouldn't refuse.
Because if she'd needed my body to practice vivisection, I would have lent it to her without giving it a second thought; likewise, if I needed to use her body for pleasure, it shouldn't be a problem either.
But she was a woman, and women in general were more or less small-minded.
For that reason, I needed to expand her mind, so I began to explain what "brotherhood" was.
In my opinion, brotherhood was the kind of great friendship that only existed among the outlaws of the forest.
Take the heroes in The Legend of the Water Margins for example. Those guys would kill and set fires as soon as eat. But as long as they heard the great name of Timely Rain, they would fall to their knees and kowtow.
Like them, I believed in nothing but brotherhood.
If you were my friend, even if you committed a crime beyond Heaven's forgiveness, I would still stand by you.
That night, I offered my great friendship to Chen Qingyang and she was immediately moved to tears. She accepted my friendship right away, and, what was more, even expressed her wish to reward me with a greater friendship, saying that she would never betray me even if I turned out to be a low-down, shifty little scoundrel.
Relieved by her words, naturally I told her what was really on my mind: I'm twenty-one, but I've never experienced what happens between a man and a woman. I really can't resign myself to that.
She stared at me blankly after hearing my words—maybe she was not prepared for this.
I kept persuading her, which didn't seem to work, so I put my hand on her shoulder and felt the tension in her muscles.
The woman could change her mind any minute and slap me—if that occurred, it would only prove that women didn't understand what great friendship meant.
But to my surprise, she didn't slap me.
Instead she snorted and then started laughing.
How stupid I am!
To be tricked so easily!
What trick?
What are you talking about?
She said, I didn't say anything.
I asked her will you do it or not?
She said "Pah!" and she blushed.
It looked like she was a little shy, so I decided to take the initiative and began to get fresh with her.
She tried to push me away a few times, and then said, No, not here. Let's go up to the mountain.
So I followed her all the way up to the mountain.
Later on, Chen Qingyang told me that she had never been able to figure out whether my great friendship was true or just a lie that I had made up then to trick her.
But she said that those words enchanted her like a spell, and that even if she lost everything because of it she'd have no regrets.
Actually, the great friendship was neither true nor false, like everything else in the world. It was true if you believed it, and false if you didn't; my words were also neither true nor false, but I was prepared to stand by my words anytime and wouldn't back off even if the sky collapsed and the earth cracked open.
Because of this attitude of mine, no one really believed me, which explained why I made no more than a couple of friends, including Chen Qingyang, even though I took it on as a lifelong cause.
That night, halfway up the mountain, Chen Qingyang told me that she needed to go back to her place to get something, telling me to wait for her on the other side of the mountain.
I suspected that she might want to stand me up, but I didn't say anything. I went straight to the other side of the mountain and smoked.
After a while, she arrived.
Chen Qingyang said that the first time I went to her for a shot, she was dozing at her desk.
In Yunnan everyone had plenty of time to nap, so they always seemed half asleep and half awake.
When I walked into her clinic, the room dimmed for a moment because it was a thatched mud hut where most of the sunshine came in through the door.
She awakened right then, raised her head, and asked what I was doing there.
I said my lower back hurt and she told me to lie down so that she could take a look at it.
I threw myself headlong onto the bamboo bed and nearly crushed it—my lower back hurt so much that I simply could not bend.
If it hadn't been for that I wouldn't have gone to see her.
Chen Qingyang said my mouth had lines around it even when I was very young, and dark circles always showed under my eyes.
I was a tall man of few words in worn-out clothes.
She gave me a shot and I left. Maybe I thanked her, or maybe I didn't.
When she had the idea I could prove she wasn't damaged goods, only half a minute passed.
She ran out and found me taking a shortcut to the fourteenth team.
I strode down the slope, leaping over the ditches and mounds whenever there was one, descending rapidly along the mountain slope.
It was a morning in the dry season, and the wind blew up from the foot of the mountain, so I couldn't have heard anything even if she'd called me, not to mention that I never looked back anyway.
So that was the way I left.
Chen Qingyang said she had wanted to go after me then, but felt it would be hard to catch up, and besides I might not be able to prove her innocence.
So she walked back to the clinic.
She changed her mind later because she realized since everyone accused her of being damaged goods, they were all her enemies.
It was possible that I was not her enemy.
She didn't want to risk turning me into an enemy also.
I smoked on the back slope of the mountain that night.
Even though it was evening I could see into the distance, because the moonlight was bright, and the air was clear in that region.
Every now and then, I could hear dogs barking in the distance.
I spotted Chen Qingyang as soon as she came out of the fifteenth team—I doubted if I could see that far during the day.
But it felt different from the day.
Perhaps because there was no one around.
I couldn't tell whether there were people around or not in the evening, because it was silver-gray everywhere.
If you traveled with a torch, it meant you wanted the whole world to know where you were; if you didn't, it would be like wearing a cape of invisibility—people who knew you were there could see you, and people who didn't couldn't.
When I saw Chen Qingyang slowly coming toward me, my heart began to pound, and it occurred to me without any instruction that we should have a little foreplay before getting down to business.
Chen Qingyang reacted pretty coldly to this.
Her lips were icy, and she didn't respond to my caresses at all.
By the time I tried to unbutton her dress, all thumbs, she pushed me away and started taking off her clothes by herself, piece by piece. She folded her clothes neatly and put them aside. Then she lay down stiffly on the grass.
Her naked body was extremely beautiful.
I took off my clothes in a hurry and crawled over to her. Again she pushed me off, handing me something, saying, "Know how to use this?
Want me to teach you?"
It was a condom.
I was at the height of my excitement and the tone of her voice upset me a little.
But I put on the condom anyway and crawled on top of her. Heart racing and out of breath, I fumbled for quite a while and couldn't get it right.
Again I heard her cold voice, "Hey, do you know what you're doing?"
I said, Of course I do.
Could you please move a little closer?
I want to study your anatomy in the light.
Then with a sound as loud as a thunderclap at my ear, I realized she'd given me a big slap.
I jumped to my feet, grabbed my clothes, and ran.
FULL PURPLE LIPS, like ripe grapes, gave Second Grandma – Passion – her extraordinary appeal.
The sands of time had long since interred her origins and background.
Her rich, youthful, resilient flesh, her plump bean-pod face, and her deep-blue, seemingly deathless eyes were buried in the wet yellow earth, extinguishing for all time her angry, defiant gaze, which challenged the world of filth, adored the world of beauty, and brimmed over with an intense consciousness.
Second Grandma had been buried in the black earth of her hometown.
Her body was enclosed in a coffin of thin willow covered with an uneven coat of reddish-brown varnish that failed to camouflage its wormy, beetle-holed surface.
The sight of her blackened, blood-shiny corpse being swallowed up by golden earth is etched forever on the screen of my mind.
In the warm red rays of the sun, I saw a mound in the shape of a human figure rising atop the heavy, deeply remorseful sandbar.
Second Grandma's shapely figure; Second Grandma's high-arching breasts; tiny grains of shifting sand on Second Grandma's furrowed brow; Second Grandma's sensual lips protruding through the golden-yellow sand . . .
I knew it was an illusion, that Second Grandma was buried beneath the black earth of her hometown, and that only red sorghum grew around her gravesite. Standing at the head of her grave – as long as it isn't during the winter, when the plants are dead and frozen, or on a spring day, when cool southerly breezes blow – you can't even see the horizon for the nightmarishly dense screen of Northeast Gaomi sorghum.
Then you raise your gaunt face, like a sunflower, and through the gaps in the sorghum you can see the stunning brilliance of the sun hanging in the kingdom of heaven.
Amid the perennially mournful sobs of the Black Water River you listen for a lost soul drifting down from that kingdom.
THE SKY WAS a beautiful clear blue. The sun hadn't yet made an appearance, but the chaotic horizon on that early-winter morning was infused with a blinding red light when Old Geng shot at a red fox with a fiery torch of a tail.
Old Geng had no peers among hunters in Saltwater Gap, where he bagged wild geese, hares, wild ducks, weasels, foxes, and, when there was nothing else around, sparrows.
In the late autumn and early winter, enormous flocks of sparrows flew over Northeast Gaomi Township, a shifting brown cloud that rolled and tumbled above the boundless land.
At dusk they returned to the village, where they settled on willows whose naked, yellowing limbs drooped earthward or arched skyward.
As the dying red rays of the evening sun burned through the clouds, the branches lit up with sparrows' black eyes shining like thousands of golden sparks.
Old Geng picked up his shotgun, squinted, and pulled the trigger. Two sparrows crashed to the ground like hailstones as shotgun pellets tore noisily through the branches.
Uninjured sparrows saw their comrades hit the ground and flapped their wings, rising into the air like shrapnel sent flying high into a lethargic sky.
Father had eaten some of Old Geng's sparrows when he was young.
They were delicious.
Three decades later, my older brother and I went into the sorghum field and engaged some crafty sparrows in a heated battle.
Old Geng, who was already over seventy by then and lived alone as a pensioner, was one of our most revered villagers. Asked to speak at meetings to air grievances against the old order, he invariably stripped to the waist onstage to show his scars.
'The Japs bayoneted me eighteen times,' he'd say, 'until you couldn't see my skin for all the blood. But I didn't die, and you know why?
Because I was protected by a fox fairy.
I don't know how long I lay there, but when I opened my eyes all I could see was a bright-red light. The fox fairy was licking my wounds.'
In his home, Old Geng – Eighteen Stabs Geng – kept a fox-fairy memorial tablet, which some Red Guards decided to smash during the Cultural Revolution. They changed their minds and got out of there fast when they saw him kneel in front of the tablet wielding a cleaver.
Old Geng drew a bead on the red fox, knowing exactly which way it would run; but he was reluctant to shoot.
He knew he could sell the beautiful, bushy pelt for a good price.
If he was going to shoot, it had to be now. The fox had already enjoyed a full life, sneaking over nightly to steal a chicken.
No matter how strong the villagers made their chicken coops, the fox always found a way inside and no matter how many traps they set, it always got away.
That year the villagers' chicken coops seemed built solely to store its food.
Old Geng had walked out of the village as the roosters were crowing for the third time and gone straight to a low embankment alongside the swamp in front of the village, where he waited for the chicken thief to show up.
Dried-up marsh weeds stood waist-high in the swamp, where a thin sheet of nearly transparent ice, possibly thick enough to bear a man's weight, covered the stagnant water that had accumulated during the autumn rains. Yellow tassels atop imprisoned reeds shivered in the freezing morning air, as powerful rays of light from far off in the eastern sky gradually illuminated the icy surface, which gave off a moist radiance, like the scales of a carp.
Then the eastern sky turned bright, staining the ice and reeds the colour of mottled blood.
Old Geng picked up the odour and saw a tight cluster of reeds part slowly like an undulating wave, then close up quickly.
He stuck his nearly frozen index finger into his mouth and breathed on it, then wrapped it around the frost-covered trigger.
The fox bounded out of the clump of reeds and stood on the ice, turning it a bright red, as though it had gone up in flames.
Congealed blood covered its pointy little snout; a chicken feather the colour of hemp was stuck in its whiskers.
It walked with stately grace across the ice.
Old Geng cried out, and it froze on the spot, squinting to get a good look at the embankment.
Old Geng shivered, closed his eyes, and fired.
Old Geng, his shoulder numb from the recoil, stood up under a silvery sky, looking bigger and taller than usual.
Like a little fireball, the fox rolled into the reeds.
He knew the fox was hiding amid the reeds and staring at him with loathing.
Something suspiciously like a guilty conscience began to stir in Old Geng.
He thought back over the past year and the trust the fox had shown in him: it always knew he was hiding behind the embankment, yet it sauntered across the ice as though putting his conscience to the test.
But now he had betrayed this friendship, and he hung his head, gazing into the clump of reeds that had swallowed the fox, not even turning back to look when he heard the clatter of footsteps behind him.
Suddenly he felt a stabbing pain, and stumbled forward, twisting his body, dropping his shotgun to the ice.
Something hot squirmed under his pants at the belt line.
Running towards him were a dozen uniformed figures armed with rifles and glinting bayonets.
Instinctively he yelled in fear, 'Japan!'
The Japanese soldiers pounced on him and bayoneted him in the chest and abdomen.
He screamed pitifully, like a fox howling for its mate.
The blood from his wounds pitted the ice beneath him with its heat.
He ripped off his tattered shirt with both hands.
In his semiconscious state he saw the furry red fox emerge from the clump of reeds and circle round him once, then crouch down and gaze sympathetically.
Its fur glowed brilliantly and its slightly slanted eyes shone like emeralds.
After a while, Old Geng felt warm fur rubbing against his body, and he lay there waiting for the razor-sharp teeth to begin ripping him apart.
If he were torn to shreds, he'd die with no complaints, for he knew that a man who betrays a trust is lower than an animal.
The fox began licking his wounds with its cold tongue.
Old Geng was adamant that the fox had repaid his betrayal by saving his life. Where else could you find another man who had sustained eighteen bayonet wounds yet lived to tell the tale?
The fox's tongue must have been coated with a miraculous substance since Old Geng's wounds were instantly soothed, as though treated with peppermint oil – or so he said.
VILLAGERS WHO HAD gone to town to sell straw sandals announced upon their return: 'Gaomi has been occupied by the Japanese. There's a Rising Sun at the entrance!'
The panic-stricken villagers could only wait for the calamity they knew was coming.
But not all of them suffered from racing hearts and crawling flesh: two among them went about their business totally unconcerned, never varying their routine.
Who were they? One was Old Geng, the other a onetime musician who loved to sing Peking opera – Pocky Cheng.
'What are you afraid of?' Pocky Cheng asked everyone he met.
'We're still common folk, no matter who's in charge.
We don't refuse to give the government its grain, and we always pay our taxes. We lie down when we're told, and we kneel when they order us. So who'd dare punish us?
Who, I ask you?'
His advice calmed many of the people, who began sleeping, eating, and working again.
But it didn't take long for the evil wind of Japanese savagery to blow their way: they fed human hearts to police dogs; they raped sixty-year-old women; they hung rows of human heads from electric poles in town.
Even with the unflappable examples of Pocky Cheng and Old Geng, rumours of brutality were hard for the people to put aside, especially in their dreams.
Pocky Cheng walked around happy all the time. News that the Japanese were on their way to sack the village created a glut in dogshit in and around the village. Apparently the farmers who normally fought over it had grown lazy, for now it lay there waiting for him to come and claim it.
He, too, walked out of the village as the roosters were crowing for the third time, running into Old Geng with his shotgun slung over his back. They greeted each other and parted ways.
By the time the eastern sky had turned red, the pile of dogshit in Pocky Cheng's basket was like a little mountain peak.
He laid it down, stood on the southern edge of the village wall, and breathed in the cool, sweet morning air, until his throat itched.
He cleared it loudly, then raised his voice to the rosy morning clouds and began to sing: 'I am a thirsty grainstalk drinking up the morning dew –'
A shot rang out.
His battered, wingless felt hat sailed into the air. Tucking in his neck, he jumped into the ditch beneath the wall like a shot, bumping his head with a resounding thud against the frozen ground.
Not sure if he was dead or alive, he tried moving his arms and legs. They were working, but barely.
His crotch was all sticky.
Fear raced through his heart. I've been hit, he thought.
He sat up and stuck his hand down his pants.
With his heart in his mouth, he pulled out his hand, expecting it to be all red. But it was covered with something yellow, and his nostrils twitched from the odour of rotten seedlings.
He tried to rub the stuff off on the side of the ditch, but it stuck to his skin. He heard a shout from beyond the ditch: 'Stand up!'
He looked up to see a man in his thirties with a flat, chiselled face, yellow skin, and a long, jutting chin. He was wearing a chestnut-coloured wool cap and brandishing a black pistol!
A forest of yellow-clad legs was aligned behind him, the calves wrapped in wide, crisscrossed cloth leggings. His eyes travelled slowly upward past protruding hips, stopping at dozens of alien faces, all adorned with the smug smile of a man taking a comfortable shit.
A Rising Sun flag drooped under the bright-red sunrise; onion-green rays glinted off a line of bayonets.
Pocky Cheng's stomach lurched, and his nervous guts relinquished their contents.
'Get up here!'
Chestnut Wool Cap barked out angrily.
Pocky Cheng climbed out of the ditch. Not knowing what to say, he just bowed repeatedly.
Chestnut Wool Cap was twitching right under his nose. 'Are there Nationalist troops in the village?' he asked.
Pocky Cheng looked at him blankly.
A Japanese soldier waved a bloodstained bayonet in front of Pocky Cheng's chest and face. He heard his stomach growl and felt his intestines writhe and twist slowly; at any other moment, he would have welcomed the intensely pleasant sensation of a bowel movement.
The Japanese soldier shouted something and swung the bayonet, slicing Pocky Cheng's padded jacket down the middle and freeing the cotton wadding inside. The sharp pain of parted skin and sliced muscles leaped from his rib cage.
He doubled over, all the foul liquids in his body seeming to pour out at once.
He looked imploringly into the enraged Japanese face and began to wail.
Chestnut Wool Cap drove the barrel of his pistol into his forehead. 'Stop blubbering!
The commander asked you a question!
What village is this?
Is it Saltwater Gap?'
He nodded, trying hard to control his sobs.
'Is there a man in the village who makes straw sandals?'
Chestnut Wool Cap softened his tone a little.
Ignoring his pain, he eagerly and ingratiatingly replied, 'Yes yes yes.'
'Did he take his straw sandals to market day in Gaomi yesterday?'
'Yes yes yes,' he jabbered.
Warm blood had slithered down from his chest to his belly.
'How about pickles?'
'I don't know . . . don't think so. . . .'
Chestnut Wool Cap slapped him across the mouth and shouted: 'Tell me!
I want to know about pickles!'
'Yes yes yes, your honour,' he muttered obsequiously. 'Commander, every family has pickles, you can find them in every pickle vat in the village.'
'Stop acting like a fucking idiot. I want to know if there's somebody called Pickles!'
Chestnut Wool Cap slapped him across the face, over and over.
'Yes . . . no . . . yes . . . no . . .
Your honour . . . don't hit me . . .
Please don't hit me . . . your honour . . .' he mumbled, reeling from the slaps.
The Japanese said something. Chestnut Wool Cap swept the hat off his head and bowed, then turned back, the smile on his face gone in an instant. He shoved Pocky Cheng and said with a scowl, 'We want to see all the sandal makers in the village. You lead the way.'
Concerned about the dung basket he'd left on the wall, Pocky Cheng instinctively cocked his head in that direction. A bayonet that shone like snow flashed past his cheek.
Quickly concluding that his life was worth more than a dung basket and spade, he turned his head back and set out for the village on his bandy legs.
Dozens of Japs fell in behind him, their leather boots crunching across the frost-covered grass.
A few grey dogs barked tentatively.
I'm really in a fix this time, Pocky Cheng was thinking. No one else went out to collect dogshit, no one but me, and I ran into some real dogshit luck.
The fact that the Japanese didn't appreciate his good-citizen attitude frustrated him.
He led them quickly to each of the sandal makers' cellars. Whoever Pickle was, he was sure in one now.
Pocky Cheng looked off into the distance towards his house, where green smoke curled into the sky from the solitary kitchen chimney. It was the most intense longing for home he'd ever known. As soon as he was finished he'd go there, change into clean pants, and have his wife rub some lime into the bayonet wound on his chest.
The great woodwind player of Northeast Gaomi Township had never been in such a mess.
Oh, how he longed for his lovely wife, who had grumbled about his pocked face at first, but, resigned at last, had decided that if you marry a chicken you share the coop; marry a dog and you share the kennel.
EARLY-MORNING GUNFIRE beyond the village startled Second Grandma out of a dream in which she was fighting Grandma tooth and nail.
She sat up, her heart thumping wildly, and, try as she might, she couldn't decide if the noise had just been part of the dream.
The window was coated with pale morning sunlight; a grotesque pattern of frost had formed on the pane.
Shuddering from the cold, she tilted her head so she could see her daughter, my aunt, who was lying beside her, snoring peacefully.
The sweet, even breathing of the five-year-old girl soothed Second Grandma's fears.
Maybe it was only Old Geng shooting at wild game, a mountain lion or something, she consoled herself. She had no way of knowing how accurate her prediction was, nor could she have known that while she was sliding back under the covers the tips of Japanese bayonets were jabbing Old Geng's ribs.
Little Auntie rolled over and nestled up against Second Grandma, who wrapped her arms around her until she could feel the little girl's warm breath against her chest.
Eight years had passed since Grandma had kicked her out of the house. During that time, Granddad had been tricked into going to the Jinan police station, where he nearly lost his life.
But he managed to escape and make his way home, where Grandma had taken Father to live with Black Eye, the leader of the Iron Society.
When Granddad fought Black Eye to a standstill at the Salty Water River, he touched Grandma so deeply she followed him home, where they ran the distillery with renewed vitality.
Granddad put his rifle away, bringing his bandit days to an end, and began life as a wealthy peasant, at least for the next few years.
They were troubling years, thanks to the rivalry between Grandma and Second Grandma.
In the end, they reached a 'tripartite agreement' in which Granddad would spend ten days with Grandma, then ten days with Second Grandma – ten days was the absolute limit.
He stuck to his bargain, since neither woman was an economy lantern, someone to be taken lightly.
Second Grandma was enjoying the sweetness of her sorrows as she hugged Little Auntie.
She was three months pregnant.
A period of increased tenderness, pregnancy is a time of weakness during which women need attention and protection, and Second Grandma was no exception. Counting the days on her fingers, she longed for Granddad. He would be there tomorrow.
Another crisp gunshot sounded outside the village,
Longtang
LOOKED DOWN UPON from the highest point in the city, Shanghai's longtang—her vast neighborhoods inside enclosed alleys—are a magnificent sight.
The longtang are the backdrop of this city.
Streets and buildings emerge around them in a series of dots and lines, like the subtle brushstrokes that bring life to the empty expanses of white paper in a traditional Chinese landscape painting.
As day turns into night and the city lights up, these dots and lines begin to glimmer. However, underneath the glitter lies an immense blanket of darkness—these are the longtang of Shanghai.
The darkness looks almost to be a series of furious waves that threaten to wash away the glowing dots and lines.
It has volume, whereas all those lines and dots float on the surface—they are there only to differentiate the areas of this dark mass, like punctuation marks whose job it is to break up an essay into sentences and paragraphs.
The darkness is like an abyss—even a mountain falling in would be swallowed whole and sink silently to the bottom.
Countless reefs lurk beneath this swelling ocean of darkness, where one false move could capsize a ship.
The darkness buoys up Shanghai's handful of illuminated lines and dots, supporting them decade after decade.
Against this decades-old backdrop of darkness, the Paris of the Orient unfolds her splendor.
Today, everything looks worn out, exposing bit by bit what lies underneath.
One strand at a time, the first rays of the morning sun shine through just as, one by one, the city lights go out.
Everything begins from a cover of light fog, through which a horizontal ray of light crafts an outline as if drawing it out with a fine brush.
First to appear are the dormer windows protruding from the rooftop tingzijian of those traditional longtang buildings, showing themselves off with a certain self-conscious delicacy; the wooden shutters are carefully delineated, the handmade rooftop tiles are arranged with precision, even the potted roses on the windowsills have been cared for painstakingly.
Next to emerge are the balconies; here articles of clothing hung out to dry the night before cling motionless like a scene out of a painting. The cement on the balustrade peels away to reveal the rusty red bricks beneath—this too looks as if painted in a picture, each brushstroke appearing clear and distinct.
After that come the cracked gable walls, lined with traces of green moss that look cold and clammy to the touch.
The first rays of light shining on the gable walls create a stunning picture, a gorgeous portrait, bearing just a hint of desolation, fresh and new yet not without a past.
At this moment the cement pavement of the longtang is still enveloped in fog, which lingers thick in the back alleys.
But on the iron-railed balconies of the newer longtang apartments the sunlight is already striking the glass panes on the French doors, which refract the light.
This stroke is a relatively sharp one, and seems to pull back the curtain that separates day from night.
The sunlight finally drives away the fog, washing everything in its path with a palette of strong color. The moss turns out to be not green but a dark raven hue, the wooden window frames start to blacken, and the iron railing on the balcony becomes a rusted yellow. One can see blades of green grass growing from between the cracks in the gables, and the white pigeons turn gray as they soar up into the sky.
Shanghai's longtang come in many different forms, each with colors and sounds of its own.
Unable to decide on any one appearance, they remain fickle, sometimes looking like this, sometimes looking like that.
Actually, despite their constant fluctuations, they always remain the same—the shape may shift but the spirit is unchanged. Back and forth they go, but in the end it's the same old story, like an army of a thousand united by a single goal.
Those longtang that have entryways with stone gates emanate an aura of power. They have inherited the style of Shanghai's glorious old mansions. Sporting the facade of an official residence, they make it a point to have a grandiose entrance and high surrounding walls.
But, upon entering, one discovers that the courtyard is modest and the reception area narrow—two or three steps and you are already at the wooden staircase across the room.
The staircase is not curved, but leads straight up into the bedroom, where a window overlooking the street hints at romantic ardor.
The trendy longtang neighborhoods in the eastern district of Shanghai have done away with such haughty airs. They greet you with low wrought-iron gates of floral design. For them a small window overlooking a side street is not enough; they all have to have walk-out balconies, the better to enjoy the street scenery.
Fragrant oleanders reach out over the courtyard walls, as if no longer able to contain their springtime passion.
Deep down, however, those inside still have their guard up: the back doors are bolted shut with spring locks of German manufacture, the windows on the ground floor all have steel bars, the low front gates of wrought iron are crowned with ornamented spikes, and walls protect the courtyard on all sides. One may enter at will, but escape seems virtually impossible.
On the western side of the city, the apartment-style longtang take an even stricter approach to security. These structures are built in clusters, with doors that look as if not even an army of ten thousand could force their way inside. The walls are soundproof so that people living even in close quarters cannot hear one another, and the buildings are widely spaced so that neighbors can avoid one another.
This is security of a democratic sort—trans-Atlantic style—to ensure and protect individual freedom. Here people can do whatever their hearts desire, and there is no one to stop them.
The longtang in the slums are open-air. The makeshift roofs leak in the rain, the thin plywood walls fail to keep out the wind, and the doors and windows never seem to close properly.
Apartment structures are built virtually on top of one another, cheek by jowl, breathing down upon each other's necks. Their lights are like tiny glowing peas, not very bright, but dense as a pot of pea porridge.
Like a great river, these longtang have innumerable tributaries, and their countless branches resemble those of a tall tree.
Crisscrossing, they form a giant web.
On the surface they appear entirely exposed, but in reality they conceal a complex inner soul that remains mysterious, unfathomable.
As dusk approaches, flocks of pigeons hover about the Shanghai skyline in search of their nests.
The rooftop ridges rise and fall, extending into the distance; viewed from the side, they form an endless mountain range, and from the front, a series of vertical summits.
Viewed from the highest peak, they merge into one boundless vista that looks the same from all directions.
Like water flowing aimlessly, they seem to creep into every crevice and crack, but upon closer inspection they fall into an orderly pattern.
At once dense and wide-ranging, they resemble rye fields where the farmers, having scattered their seeds, are now harvesting a rich crop. Then again, they are a little like a pristine forest, living and dying according to its own cycle.
Altogether they make for a scene of the utmost beauty and splendor.
The longtang of Shanghai exude a sensuality like the intimacy of flesh on flesh—cool and warm, tangible and knowable, a little self-centered.
The grease-stained rear kitchen window is where the amah gossips. Beside the window is the back door; from this the eldest daughter goes out to school and holds her secret rendezvous with her boyfriend. The front door, reserved for distinguished guests, opens only on important occasions. On each side of the door hang couplets announcing marriages, funerals, and other family events.
The door seems always to be in a state of uncontrollable, even garrulous, excitement.
Echoes of secret whispers linger around the flat roof, the balcony, and the windows. At night, the sounds of rapping on the doors rise and fall in the darkness.
To return to the highest point in the city and look down on it from another angle: clothes hanging out to dry on the cluttered bamboo poles hint at the private lives and loves that lie hidden beneath. In the garden, potted balsams, ghost flowers, scallions, and garlic also breathe the faint air of a secret affair. The empty pigeon cage up on the roof is an empty heart. Broken roof tiles lying in disarray are symbols of the body and soul.
Some of the gullylike alleys are lined with cement, others with cobblestone.
The cement alleys make you feel cut off, while the cobblestone alleys give the sensation of a fleshy hand.
Footsteps sound different in these two types of longtang. In the former the sound is crisp and bright, but in the latter it is something that you absorb and keep inside. The former is a collection of polite pleasantries, the latter of words spoken from the bottom of one's heart. Neither is like an official document; both belong to the necessary language of the everyday.
The back alleys of Shanghai try even harder to work their way into people's hearts. The pavement is covered with a layer of cracks. Gutters overflow; floating in the discolored water are fish scales and rotten vegetable leaves, as well as the greasy lampblack from the stovetop.
It is dirty and grimy, impure, here. Here the most private secrets are exposed, and not always in the most conventional fashion.
Because of this a pall hangs over these back alleys.
The sunlight does not shine through until three o'clock in the afternoon and before long the sun begins to set in the west.
But this little bit of sunlight envelops the back alleys in a blanket of warm color. The walls turn a brilliant yellow, highlighting the unevenness of the rough whetstone and giving it the texture of coarse sand.
The windows also turn a golden yellow, but they are scratched and stained.
By now the sun has been shining down for a long time and is beginning to show signs of fatigue. Summoning up the last vestiges of radiance from the depths, the lingering rays of sunlight flicker with a sticky thickness of built-up residue, rather dirty.
As twilight encroaches, flocks of pigeons soar overhead, dust motes drift, and stray cats wander in and out of sight.
This is a feeling that, having penetrated the flesh, goes beyond closeness. One begins to weary of it. It breeds a secret fear, but hidden within that fear is an excitement that gnaws down to the bone.
What moves you about the longtang of Shanghai stems from the most mundane scenes: not the surging rush of clouds and rain, but something steadily accumulated over time.
It is the excitement of cooking smoke and human vitality.
Something is flowing through the longtang that is unpredictable yet entirely rational, small, not large, and trivial—but then even a castle can be made out of sand.
It has nothing to do with things like "history," not even "unofficial history": we can only call it gossip.
Gossip is yet another landscape in the Shanghai longtang—you can almost see it as it sneaks out through the rear windows and the back doors.
What emerges from the front doors and balconies is a bit more proper—but it is still gossip.
These rumors may not necessarily qualify as history, but they carry with them the shadows of time. There is order in their progression, which follows the law of preordained consequences.
These rumors cling to the skin and stick to the flesh; they are not cold or stiff, like a pile of musty old books. Though marred by untruths, these are falsehoods that have feeling.
When the city's streetlights are ablaze, its longtang remain in darkness, save the lonely street lamps hanging on the alley corners. The lamps, enclosed in crude frames of rusty iron covered with dust, emit a murky yellow glow. On the ground, a shroud of thick mist forms and begins to spread out—this is the time when rumors and gossip start to brew.
It is a gloomy hour, when nothing is clear, yet it is enough to break the heart.
Pigeons coo in their cages, talking their language of secret whispers.
The streetlights shine with a prim and proper light, but as soon as that light streams into the longtang alleys, it is overwhelmed by darkness.
The kind of gossip exchanged in the front rooms and adjoining wings belongs to the old school and smacks faintly of potpourri. The gossip in the rooftop tingzijian and staircases is new school and smells of mothballs.
But, old school or new, gossip is always told in earnest—you could even say it is told in the spirit of truth.
This is like scooping water with one's hands: even though you might lose half the water along the way, with enough persistence you can still fill up a pond. Or like the swallow that, though she may drop half the earth and twigs she is carrying in her beak, can still build a nest—there is no need for laziness or trickery.
The longtang of Shanghai are an unbearable sight. The patches of green moss growing in the shade are, in truth, like scars growing over a wound; it takes time for the wound to heal.
It is because the moss lacks a proper place that it grows in the shade and shadows—years go by and it never sees the sun.
Now ivy grows out in the open, but it serves as Time's curtain and always has something to hide.
The pigeons gaze down at the outstretching billows of roof tiles as they take to the air, and their hearts are stabbed with pain.
Coming up over the longtang rooftops, the sun shoots out its belabored rays—a majestic sight pieced together from countless minute fragments, an immense power born of immeasurable patience.
Gossip
Gossip always carries with it an exhalation of gloom.
This murky air sometimes smells like lavender in a bedroom, sometimes like mothballs, and at other times like a kitchen chopping block.
It does not remind you of the smell of tobacco plugs or cigars, nor is it even faintly reminiscent of the smell of insecticides like Lindane or Dichlorvos.
It is not a strong masculine scent, but a soft feminine one—the scent of a woman.
It combines the smell of the bedroom and the kitchen, the smell of cosmetics and cooking oil, mixed in with a bit of sweat.
Gossip is always trailed by clouds and a screen of mist. Shadowy and indistinct, it is a fogged-up window—a windowpane covered with a layer of dust.
Shanghai has as many rumors as longtang: too many to be counted, too many to be told.
There is something infectious about gossip; it can transform an official biography into a collection of dubious tales, so that truth becomes indistinguishable from gossip.
In the world of rumor, fact cannot be separated from fiction; there is truth within lies, and lies within the truth.
That gossip should put on an absurd face is unavoidable; this absurdity is the incredulity born of girlish inexperience, and is at least in part an illusion.
In places like the longtang, it travels from back door to back door, and in the blink of an eye the whole world knows all.
Gossip is like the silent electrical waves crisscrossing in the air above the city, like formless clouds that enshroud the whole city, slowly brewing into a shower, intermixing right and wrong.
The rain comes down not in a torrent but as a hazy springtime drizzle. Although not violent, it drenches the air with an inescapable humidity.
Never underestimate these rumors: soft and fine as these raindrops may be, you will never struggle free of them.
Every longtang in Shanghai is steeped in an atmosphere of gossip, where right and wrong get twisted and confused.
In the elegant apartment-style longtang on the west side of town, this atmosphere is free of clouds, refreshing and transparent as a bright autumn day. Moving down among the modern-style longtang neighborhoods, the atmosphere becomes a bit more turgid and turbulent, blowing to and fro like the wind. Lower down still is the fractious atmosphere of the old-style longtang neighborhoods with the stone gates. Here the wind has died, replaced by the vapor of a humid day. By the time one gets to where the slum-dwellers live, all is enveloped in mist—not the roseate mists of dawn, but the thick fog that comes before a torrential downpour, when you cannot see your hand in front of your face.
But regardless of the type of longtang, this atmosphere penetrates everywhere.
You could say that it is the genius loci of Shanghai's alleys.
If the longtang of Shanghai could speak, they would undoubtedly speak in rumors.
They are the thoughts of Shanghai's longtang, disseminating themselves through day and night.
If the longtang of Shanghai could dream, that dream would be gossip.
Gossip is base.
With this vulgar heart, it cannot help wallowing in self-degradation.
It is like sewer water, used, contaminated.
There is nothing aboveboard about it, nothing straight and narrow; it can only whisper secrets behind people's backs.
It feels no sense of responsibility, never takes the blame for the outcome—whatever that outcome may be. Because of this, gossip has learned to do as it pleases, running wild like a flood out of control.
It never bothers to think things over—and no one ever bothers to think it over.
It is a bit like verbal garbage, but then again one can occasionally find small treasures in the garbage.
Gossip is made up of fragments discarded from serious conversations, like the shriveled outer leaves of vegetables, or grains of sand in a bag of rice.
These bits and pieces have faces that are not quite decent; always up to something, they are spoiled merchandise.
They are actually made from the crudest materials. However, even the girls in Shanghai's west-end apartments feel compelled to stockpile some of this lowly stuff, because buried deep inside this shamefully base material is where one can find a few genuine articles.
These articles lie outside the parameters of what is dignified; their nature is such that no one dares speak of them aloud—and so they are taken and molded into gossip.
If gossip has a positive side, it is the part of it that is genuine.
The genuine, however, has a false appearance; this is what is known as "making truth out of falsehood, fact from fiction"—it is always dishing itself up in a new form, making a feint to the east while attacking from the west.
This truth is what gives you the courage to go out into the world and not fear losing face, or the courage to become a ghost—to go against prevailing opinions.
But there is a kind of sorrow that comes with this courage—the sorrow that comes from being thwarted, from being kept from doing what one wishes. However, there is a certain vital energy in this sorrow, because even in the midst of it one's heart surges with high-flying ambition; in fact, it is because of these surging ambitions that one feels such bafflement and loss.
This sorrow is not refined like Tang dynasty poetry and Song dynasty lyrics, but belongs to the world of vulgar grievances aired out in the streets.
One can feel the weight of this sorrow as it sinks to the bottom. It has nothing of the airy-fairy—the wind, flowers, snow, and the moon dancing on the water—it is the sediment that accumulates at the bottom.
Gossip always sinks to the lowest place. There is no need to go looking for it, it is already there—and it will always be there. It cannot be purified by fire or washed clean with water. It has the tenacity for holding onto life that keeps the muscles intact when the bones are shattered, that enables one to swallow the teeth broken in one's mouth—a brazen-faced tenacity.
Gossip cannot help but be swashbuckling and sensational. It travels in the company of monsters and goblins; rising with the wind, its elusive tail can never be caught.
Only in gossip can the true heart of this city be found.
No matter how gorgeous and splendid the city may look on the outside, its heart is vulgar. That heart is born of gossip, and gossip is born of the Shanghai longtang.
Magnificent tales of the Far East can be heard all over this Paris of the Orient; but peel away the outer shell and you will discover that gossip lies at its core.
Like the center of a pearl—which is actually a rough grain of sand—coarse sand is the material of which gossip is made.
Gossip always muddles the senses. Starting with inconsequential things, it winds up trying to rewrite history.
Like woodworm, it slowly chews up the books and records, eating away magnificent buildings like an army of termites.
Its methods are chaotic, without rhyme, reason, or logic. It goes wherever it wants, swaggering like a hooligan, and wastes no time on long-winded theories, nor does it go into too much detail. It simply spreads across the city, launching surprise attacks; by the time you turn around to see what sneaked up on you from behind, it has already gone without a trace. It leaves in its wake a chain of injustices with no one to take the blame and a string of scores with no one to settle with.
It makes no big, sudden movements but quietly works away without stopping. In the end, "many a little makes a lot," and trickling water flows into a great river.
This is what is meant by the saying, "Rumors rise in swarms"; they indeed drone and buzz like a nest of hornets.
A bit contemptible, maybe, but they are also conscientious.
They pick up discarded matchsticks to make a fire. If they see a lone piece of thread on the floor, they will take it up and begin to sew.
Though always making trouble, they are nevertheless earnest and sincere. Gossip is never cynical; even if the thing in question is nothing but empty rumors, the utmost care is still put into their creation.
Baseless and unreliable as these rumors may be, they are not without a certain warmth of feeling.
They mind their own business: whatever others may say, they will stick to their version—to them even settled opinions are taken under advisement.
It is not that gossip takes a different political view, but that it does not take any political view; in fact, it lacks the most basic knowledge about politics. Always going by back roads and entering through side doors, it does not stand in opposition to society—it forms its own society.
As far as society is concerned, these are small and inconsequential things, like twigs and knots on a tree. And precisely because society never takes these things seriously, they are able to maneuver unseen through the darkness and have their way.
Combined together, they constitute a power that should not be underestimated, in the way that a butterfly beating its wings here can cause a hurricane in a faraway place.
Rumors deviate from traditional moral codes but never claim to be antifeudal. Like a true bum, they chip away at the foundations of public decency.
They wouldn't hesitate to pull the emperor down off his horse—not in order to install a new republic, but merely as an act of defiance.
Despising revolutionaries and counterrevolutionaries alike, they themselves are consistently slighted and deserted by both sides.
Indeed, there is not a presentable one in the whole lot—if there were, they could be promoted to the level of "public opinion," where they could advance into the open. Instead, they have to be content with making secret maneuvers under the cover of darkness.
They care not that they are mere whispers in people's ears; they'll make their home wherever their wanderings take them, having no conception of what it means to build an enterprise.
These are creatures without ambition, holding out no hopes; in fact, they do not even have the ability to think.
All they have is the natural capacity to cause trouble and make mischief; they grow and reproduce in complete ignorance.
They reproduce at quite startling rates, hatching all at once like spawn.
Their methods of reproduction are also varied; sometimes linear, like a chain of interlocking rings, at other times concentric, like a suite of riddles.
They spread through the city air like a pack of down-at-the-heel vagrants. But the truth is, gossip is one of the things that make this city so romantic.
What makes gossip romantic is its unbridled imagination.
With the imagination completely free from all fetters, gossip can leap through the dragon's gate and squeeze through the dog's den.
No one is better at making up stories, telling lies, and wagging its tongue than gossip.
It also has boundless energy—nothing can kill it dead. Wildfires burn but, come spring, the grass will grow again.
Like the lowliest of seeds, gossip is carried by the wind to sprout and bloom in between rocks.
It works its way into every crack, even getting behind the heavy curtains of ladies' boudoirs, where it floats amid the embroidery needles in the young mistress's pincushions; and lingers among the tear-stained pages of those heartwrenching novels the schoolgirl reads in her spare time.
As the clock on the table ticks, gossip stretches itself out, even filling the basin where milady washes her rouge away.
It thrives in the most secret of places: a clandestine atmosphere is particularly beneficial to its development.
The longtang of Shanghai are very good at protecting their privacy, allowing gossip to prosper and proliferate.
Deep in the night, after everyone has turned out their lights, there is a narrow patch of light peeking out through the crack under someone's door—that is gossip. The pair of embroidered shoes in the moonlight beside the bed—that too is gossip. When the old amah, carrying her box of toiletries, says she is going out to comb her hair, she is actually off to spread gossip. The clatter of young wives shuffling mahjong tiles—that is the sound of gossip. Sparrows hopping around deserted courtyards on winter afternoons chirp about gossip.
The word "self" is embedded into gossip; and within this word "self" there is an unmentionable pain.
This bottled-up pain is different from what the Tang emperor felt at the death of Yang Guifei or the King of Chu for his beloved concubine. It is not the kind of grand and heroic suffering that moves heaven and earth, but base and lowly, like pebbles and dirt, or the tentacles of ivy creeping stealthily out of bounds.
The longtang of Shanghai are incapable of harboring the kind of suffering that inspires legends.
The pain is broken up and evenly allocated throughout the city, so that each person ends up with a small share.
Even when they suffer deep sorrow, its inhabitants keep it down inside their bellies; they do not put it on stage for people to admire, nor do they make it into lyrics to be sung by others. Only they themselves know where it comes from and whither it goes. They alone carry its burden. This is also where the word "self" comes into play, and herein, incidentally, lies the true meaning of sorrow.
Therefore we can say that gossip is painful; even if the pain does not arise from proper causes, it is still excruciating.
The pain is suffered individually, eliciting no sympathy—a lonely pain.
This is also what is moving about gossip.
The moment that gossip is born is actually the moment that people are trying their hardest to conduct themselves properly.
The people in Shanghai's longtang neighborhoods conduct themselves with the utmost attention and care; all their energy is directed to the way they carry themselves. Their eyes are focused exclusively on themselves, and they are never distracted by their surroundings.
They don't want to create a place for themselves in history: they want to create themselves. Without being ambitious, they expend every ounce of what strength they have.
This strength, too, is evenly allocated. Everyone has his fair share.
The Film Studio
FOUR DECADES THE story spans, and it all began the day she went to the film studio.
The day before, Wu Peizhen had agreed to take Wang Qiyao to have a look around the studio.
Wu Peizhen was a rather careless girl.
Under normal circumstances, she would have suffered from low self-esteem because of her homeliness, but because Peizhen came from a well-to-do family and people always doted on her, she had developed unaffected into an outgoing young lady. What would have been poor self-esteem was replaced by a kind of modesty—modesty ruled by a practical spirit.
In her modesty, she tended to exaggerate other people's strengths, place them on a pedestal, and offer them her devotion.
Wang Qiyao never had to worry about Wu Peizhen being jealous of her—and she certainly had no reason to be jealous of Wu Peizhen. On the contrary, she even felt a bit bad for Wu Peizhen—because she was so ugly.
This compassion predisposed Wang Qiyao to be generous, but naturally this generosity did not extend any further than Wu Peizhen.
Wu Peizhen's carelessness was the function of an uncalculating mind. She appreciated Wang Qiyao's magnanimity and tried even harder to please her as though repaying her kindness.
Basking in each other's company, they became the best of friends.
But Wang Qiyao's decision to befriend Wu Peizhen meant, in some way, that she was pushing a heavy load onto Wu Peizhen's shoulders.
Her beauty highlighted Wu Peizhen's unattractive appearance; her meticulousness highlighted Wu Peizhen's lack of care; her magnanimity highlighted Wu Peizhen's indebtedness.
It was a good thing that Wu Peizhen could take it; after all, the weight of everyday living did not rest as heavily on her. This was partly because she had plenty of psychic capital to draw on, but also because she simply did not mind. Things came easy to her and she was willing to bear more than her share.
Thus an equilibrium of give-and-take was maintained between the two girls and they grew closer by the day.
Wu Peizhen had a cousin who did lighting at the film studio. Occasionally he would come over to see her. In that khaki uniform of his, with its copper buttons, he came across as a bit flashy.
Wu Peizhen really could not have cared less about him; the only reason she kept him around was for Wang Qiyao.
The film studio was the stuff of girls' dreams—a place where romance is created, the kind that appears on the silver screen in movies that everyone knows as well as the off-screen type that one hears about in the enchanting gossip and rumors surrounding the lives of film stars.
The former is fake but appears real; the latter is real but seems fake.
To live in the world of the film studio is to lead a dual life.
Girls like Wu Peizhen who had all of their needs taken care of seldom wallowed in dreams; moreover, as the only girl in a house full of boys, she grew up playing boys' games and never learned the social skills and canniness most girls picked up.
However, after making friends with Wang Qiyao, she became more thoughtful.
She came to see the film studio as a gift that she could offer to Wang Qiyao.
She arranged everything carefully, only informing Wang Qiyao after she had already set a date, and was surprised when Wang Qiyao greeted the news with apparent indifference, claiming a prior engagement.
This compelled Wu Peizhen to try to change Wang Qiyao's mind by exaggerating the glamour of the film studio, combining stories her cousin bragged about with others from her own imagination.
Before long, it was more like Wang Qiyao was doing her a favor by going with her.
By the time Wang Qiyao finally gave in and agreed to go some other time, Wu Peizhen was acting as if yet another gift that she herself had to be thankful for had been bestowed upon her, and she ecstatically scurried off to find her cousin to change the date.
Wang Qiyao did not, in fact, have any prior engagement, nor was she as reluctant as she appeared; this was simply the way she conducted herself—the more interested she was in something, the more she held back. This was her means of protecting herself—or then again, was it part of a strategy of disarming an antagonist by pretending to set her free?
Whatever the reason behind her action, it was impenetrable to Wu Peizhen.
On her way to her cousin's place, she was consumed with gratitude for Wang Qiyao; all she could think about was how much face Wang Qiyao had given her by agreeing to the invitation.
The cousin was the son of Wu Peizhen's uncle on her mother's side.
This uncle was the black sheep of the family. He had driven a silk shop in Hangzhou into the ground and Wu Peizhen's mother had dreaded his visits because all he ever wanted from her was money or grain. After she gave him some heavy doses of harsh words and turned him away empty-handed several times, he gradually stopped coming around and eventually broke off all relations.
Then one day his son had showed up at her door wearing that khaki uniform with copper buttons and carrying two boxes of vegetarian dim sum as if they represented some kind of announcement.
Ever since then he would come by once every two months or so and tell them stories about the film studio. Nobody in the house was interested in his stories—nobody, that is, except Wu Peizhen.
Wu Peizhen went to the address in Qijiabing in search of her cousin. All around were thatch-covered shacks surrounded by small unmarked trails that extended in different directions, making it virtually impossible to find one's way.
People stared at her. One glance told them that she was an outsider, but just as she was getting ready to ask directions they would immediately look away.
She finally found her cousin's place, only to discover that he was not home. The young man who shared the shack with her cousin asked her in. He was wearing a pair of glasses and a set of coarse cotton clothes.
Wu Peizhen was a bit shy and waited outside. This naturally drew more curious gazes.
It was not until dusk that her cousin finally staggered in with a greasy paper bag holding a pig's head or some other cheap meat he had bought over at the butcher's shop.
By the time Wu Peizhen got home, her family was already at the dinner table and she had to fib about where she had been.
But she didn't have an ounce of regret; even when later that evening she saw the blisters on the soles of her feet from all that walking, she still felt that it was all worth it.
That night she even had a dream about the film studio. She dreamed of an elegantly dressed woman under the mercury-vapor lamps. When the woman turned to her and smiled, Wu Peizhen saw that she was none other than Wang Qiyao; she was so excited that she woke up.
Her feelings for Wang Qiyao were a bit like the puppy love that a teenage boy feels for a girl for whom he is willing to go to the edge of the earth.
She opened her eyes in the pitch-dark bedroom and wondered: Just what kind of place is this film studio anyway?
When the day finally arrived, Wu Peizhen's excitement far surpassed that of Wang Qiyao; she could barely contain herself.
A classmate asked them where they were off to. "Nowhere," Wu Peizhen casually responded, as she gave Wang Qiyao a knowing pinch on the arm. Then she pulled Wang Qiyao aside and told her to hurry up, as though afraid that that their classmate would catch up and force them to let her in on their pleasure.
The whole way there Wu Peizhen couldn't stop jabbering, attracting curious glances from people on the street. Wang Qiyao warned her several times to get hold of herself. Finally she had to stop in her tracks and declare she wasn't going any further—they had not even set foot in the studio and Wu Peizhen had already embarrassed her enough.
Only then did Wu Peizhen cool down a bit.
To get to the studio they had to take the trolley and make a transfer.
Wu Peizhen's cousin was waiting for them at the entrance; he gave each of them an ID tag to clip on her chest so that they would look like employees: that way they could wander around wherever their hearts desired.
Once inside, they walked through an empty lot littered with wooden planks, discarded cloth scraps, and chunks of broken bricks and tiles—it looked like a cross between a dump and a construction site.
Everyone approaching went at a hurried pace with their heads down.
The cousin also moved briskly, as if he had something urgent to take care of.
The two girls were left straggling behind, holding hands, trying their best to keep up.
It was three or four o'clock, the sunlight was waning and the wind picked up, rustling their skirts.
Both of them felt a bit gloomy and Wu Peizhen fell silent.
After going a few hundred steps, their journey began to feel interminable, and the girls began to lose patience with the cousin, who slowed down to regale them with some of the rumors floating around the studio; his comments, however, seemed to be neither here nor there.
Before their visit all of those anecdotes seemed real, but once they had seen the place everything was now entirely unreliable. Numbness had taken hold of them by the time they entered a large room the size of a warehouse, where uniformed workers scurried back and forth, up and down scaffolding, all the while calling out orders and directions.
But they did not see a soul who even faintly resembled a movie star.
Thoroughly disoriented, they simply trailed after Wu Peizhen's cousin, but had to watch their heads one second and their feet another, for there were ropes and wires overhead and littering the ground. They moved in and out from illuminated areas into patches of darkness and seemed to have completely forgotten their objective and had no idea where they were—all they did was walk.
After what seemed an eternity, Wu Peizhen's cousin finally stopped and had them stand off to one side—he had to go to work.
The place where they were left standing was bustling with activity; everyone seemed to be doing something as they moved briskly around the girls.
Several times, rushing to get out of one person's way, they bumped into someone else.
But they had yet to lay eyes on anyone who looked like a movie star.
They were both getting anxious, feeling that the whole trip was a mistake. Wu Peizhen could hardly bring herself to look Wang Qiyao in the eye.
All of a sudden, the lights in the room lit up like a dozen rising suns, blinding them. After their eyes adjusted they made out a portion of the warehouse-like room that had been arranged to look like one half of a bedroom.
That three-walled bedroom seemed to be the set, but everything inside was peculiarly familiar.
The comforter showed signs of wear, old cigarette butts were left in the ashtray, even the handkerchief on the nightstand beside the bed had been used, crumpled up into a ball—as if someone had removed a wall in a home where real people were living to display what went on within.
Standing there watching they were quite excited, but at the same time irritated because they were too far away to hear what was being said on set. All they could see was a woman in a sheer nightgown lying on a bed with wrinkled sheets. She tried to lie in several different positions; on her side one moment, on her back the next, and for a while even in a strange position where half her body extended off the bed onto the floor. All this became somewhat boring.
The lights turned on and off.
In the end, the woman in bed stopped moving and stayed still in the same position for quite some time before the lights once again dimmed.
When the lights came back on, everything seemed different.
During the previous few takes the light had been marked by an unbridled brilliance.
This time they seemed to be using a specialized lighting, the kind that illuminates a room during a pitch-black night.
The bedroom set seemed to be further away, but the scene became even more alive. Wang Qiyao was taking in everything.
She noticed the glow emitting from the electric lamp and the rippling shadows of the lotus-shaped lampshade projecting onto the three walls of the set.
A powerful sense of déjà vu gripped her, but no matter how hard she tried, she could not remember where she had seen this scene before.
Only after shifting her gaze to the woman under the lamplight did she suddenly realize that the actress was pretending to be dead—but she could not tell if the woman was meant to have been murdered or to have committed suicide.
The strange thing was that this scene did not appear terrifying or foreboding, only annoyingly familiar.
She could not make out the woman's features; all she could see was her head of disheveled hair strewn out along the foot of the bed. The woman's feet faced the headboard and her head lay propped against the foot of the bed, her slippers scattered on opposite sides of the room.
The film studio was a hubbub of activity, like a busy dockyard. With all the cries of "Camera" and "OK" rising and falling amid the clamor, the woman was the only thing that did not move, as if she had fallen into an eternal slumber.
Wu Peizhen was the first to lose her patience; after all, she was the more brazen one. She pulled Wang Qiyao away so they could go look around other parts of the studio.
Their next stop was a three-walled hotel lobby where a fight scene was being shot. All of the actors, in suits and leather dress shoes, were standing around when suddenly a poor fellow in tattered clothes walked onto the set and slapped the hotel manager across the face.
The way the action was carried out looked a bit ridiculous; the actor produced the slapping sound with his left hand as he slapped the restaurant owner with his right, but his timing was impeccable and one could hardly tell it was fake.
Wu Peizhen liked this scene much more than the first. She watched them do take after take without getting bored, the whole time exclaiming how much fun it was.
Wang Qiyao, however, grew impatient and said that the first one was much more interesting. She said that it was a serious film, unlike this one, which was pure buffoonery, no better than a circus sideshow.
The two returned to the first set only to discover that everyone had gone. Even the bed had been taken away, leaving only a few workers behind to straighten up the remaining items on set.
The girls wondered if they had gone to the wrong place and were about to go look elsewhere when Wu Peizhen's cousin suddenly called out to them. As it happened, he was one of the workers breaking down the set.
He told them to wait a little while, and then he would take them to watch a special effects shoot that was going on at one of the other sets!
They had no choice but to stand off to one side and wait idly.
Someone asked the cousin who his guests were and he told him. But when the man asked where they went to school, the cousin was stumped and Wu Peizhen had to answer for herself. The man flashed them a smile, revealing a set of white teeth that shimmered in the darkness of the studio.
He was the director, the cousin later told them. He had studied abroad and was also a screenwriter; in fact he had written and directed the scene they had earlier seen being filmed.
The cousin told them all this as he led them off to see the special effects shoot, where they saw smoke, fire, even ghosts.
Once again the technical people were doing all the work while the actors did virtually nothing.
Asked by Wu Peizhen if they could see some movie stars, the cousin looked embarrassed. He told them that there was not a single big star on any of the sets that day, explaining that it was not every day that big movie stars had scenes. The studio simply could not schedule things the way they would like—they had to work around the stars' schedules.
Wu Peizhen caught her cousin in a lie. "Didn't you tell us that you are always running into all these big name stars at the studio every day?" she protested.
Wang Qiyao took pity on the cousin and tried to smooth things over. "It's getting dark. We had better come back some other time. Our parents will be worried!"
As the cousin led them toward the exit they once again ran into the director. Not only did he remember them, he addressed them jocularly as "the girls from So-and-so middle school"—Wang Qiyao and Wu Peizhen turned a bright red.
On the ride home, neither was in the mood to talk and they sat silently, listening to the ringing bells of the trolley.
The trolley was half empty; the after-work rush hour was over and Shanghai's nightlife had yet to begin.
The girls' experience at the film studio was not exactly as expected; it was difficult to say whether it was disappointing or whether they had had the time of their lives—the one thing for sure was that they were both exhausted.
Wu Peizhen had never had her sights set on the studio. Her reason for going rested entirely in making Wang Qiyao happy, so naturally she had hoped it would be a wonderful trip. Just what was so wonderful about the film studio, however, Wu Peizhen had not the slightest clue—she had to wait for Wang Qiyao's reaction to find out.
The impression the film studio left on Wang Qiyao, on the other hand, was much more complicated.
It was not nearly as magical a place as she had imagined, yet because it appeared so ordinary it gave her the impression that it was within her grasp—but just what was it that she could grasp?
She had yet to figure that out.
Her initial hopes may have been dampened, but the anxiety that came with anticipation had been relieved.
In the days following their visit to the film studio, Wang Qiyao did not utter a single word about their trip, and this left Wu Peizhen quite depressed. She was afraid that Wang Qiyao had not liked the studio and the whole trip had been a complete waste.
Then one day she told Wang Qiyao in a confessional tone that her cousin had invited them back to the film studio but she had already declined the offer.
Wang Qiyao rounded on her. "How could you do that? He is trying to be nice to us!"
Wu Peizhen's eyes widened in disbelief. Wang Qiyao felt a bit uncomfortable under her stare. Turning her face away, she said, "What I mean is, you should show the guy some respect. After all, he's your cousin!"
This was one occasion when even Wu Peizhen saw through Wang Qiyao. But far from belittling her friend for being phony, Wu Peizhen felt a tenderness well up in her heart. Although on the outside she looks like a grownup, deep down she is still a child! Wu Peizhen thought to herself.
At that moment, her feeling for Wang Qiyao approached maternal love—a love that encompassed all.
From then on the film studio became a place for frequent visits.
They learned quite a few inside secrets about filmmaking. They learned that movies are never shot in sequence, but are made one scene at a time and only edited together in the final stages.
The set locations may have been dilapidated and in disrepair, but the images captured by the camera were always perfectly beautiful.
On one or two occasions they actually saw some of those famous movie stars, who sat in front of the camera doing nothing, like a collection of idle props.
Films scripts were revised at random, and in the blink of an eye even the dead could come back to life.
The girls made their way backstage, and as they rubbed their hands against the mysterious machinery that made images come to life, their hearts seemed to undergo a kind of transformation.
Time spent in a film studio is never humdrum; the experience always hints at life's greater meaning.
This is especially true for the young, who cannot yet completely distinguish truth from fiction and the real from the make-believe, and especially during that era—when movies had already become an important part of our everyday lives.
Camera
Wang Qiyao had learned that the most critical moment in making a film came the second that the director calls, "Camera." Everything up to that point boils down to preparation and foreshadowing, but what happens afterward?
It ends forever.
She came to understand the significance of the word "Camera": it announced a kind of climax.
Sometimes the director let them look through the camera and what they saw through its lens was always gorgeous; the camera had the power to filter out all of the chaos and disarray.
It had the power to make what was dark and dismal glimmer with light.
Inside the camera was a different world. After editing and postproduction, only the pure essence would remain.
The director became quite close with the girls and they eventually stopped blushing in his presence.
A few times, when Wu Peizhen's cousin was not in the studio, they even went straight to look for the director.
He had given them the nicknames "Zhen Zhen" and "Yao Yao," as if they were characters in his latest movie.
Behind their backs he described Zhen Zhen to his colleagues as a graceless servant girl right out of Dream of the Red Chamber, a little cleaning maid who thinks she is special just because she is employed in a large, wealthy household. Yao Yao he described as a proper miss who acted the part of a rich official's daughter, like the tragic lover Zhu Yingtai.
He treated Wu Peizhen as if she were a child; he loved to tease her and play little jokes on her. He promised to put Wang Qiyao in a scene in one of his movies as soon as the opportunity arose. Who knows? Because her coquettish eyes resembled Ruan Lingyu's, they might even be able to capitalize on the audience's nostalgia for the dead movie star and make Wang Qiyao into a new diva of the screen.
Although he seemed to be kidding, this was the director's reserved and humorous way of making a promise.
Wang Qiyao naturally did not take him too seriously, but she did kind of like being compared to Ruan Lingyu.
Then one day the director telephoned Wang Qiyao at home to have her come down to the studio for a screen test.
Wang Qiyao's heart raced and her hands grew clammy. She was unsure if this was the opportunity she had been waiting for. She wondered: Could my big chance really come this easily?
She could not believe it, neither did she dare not to believe it. Deep down her heart was in knots.
At first she did not want to tell Wu Peizhen about it. She planned to sneak off alone and return before anyone noticed that she was gone. In case nothing came of the screen test, it would be her own little secret and she could pretend that nothing had ever happened.
But then, just before the day of her screen test, she broke down and asked Wu Peizhen to go with her so that she would not be too nervous.
Wang Qiyao did not sleep well the night before; her face appeared thinner than usual and she had dark rings around her eyes.
Wu Peizhen naturally jumped for joy as all kinds of wild ideas went flying through her head. In no time she was talking about organizing press conferences for Wang Qiyao, who regretted telling her friend about the screen test.
Neither of them paid attention during their classes that afternoon.
When school finally let out the two rushed out of the gate and hopped onto the trolley car.
Most of the passengers at that time of the day were housewives with cloth bags in hand, wearing wrinkled cheongsams, the seams of their stockings running crookedly up the back of their legs. They either had messy, disheveled hair or, if they had just walked out of the beauty salon, hair that look like a helmet. Their faces were rigid, as if nothing in the world concerned them.
Even the trolley seemed to be afflicted with an air of apathy as it rattled along the tracks.
Amid this sea of indifference, Wang Qiyao and Wu Peizhen were animated and alive. Though neither said a word, centuries of anticipation and excitement were brewing inside them.
At three o'clock in the afternoon, the Shanghai boulevards were suffused with weariness, preparing to sign out and change shifts.
The sun hung in the western sky above the apartment buildings, glowing ripe and golden.
Their hearts were filled with anticipation as if they were about to begin a brand-new day.
The director led them into the dressing room and had a makeup artist work on Wang Qiyao.
Seeing herself reflected in the mirror, Wang Qiyao could not help feeling that her face was small and her features plain—she realized that a miracle would not occur—and this depressed her.
She became completely resigned as the makeup man worked on her. She even closed her eyes for a while to avoid looking in the mirror, uncomfortable and anxious only to get everything over and done with. She even got neurotic and thought that the makeup man, impatient to get finished with her, was applying the makeup hurriedly and crudely.
When she opened her eyes once again and looked, she saw the awkward expression of someone who had no desire to be there.
The harsh, unmodulated light of the dressing room made everything appear commonplace.
Losing all confidence in herself, Wang Qiyao decided to simply let everything ride; she focused on watching the makeup man gradually transform her into someone else—a stranger she did not recognize.
It was then that she began to calm down and her tensions eased. By the time the makeup man finished his job, she had even started to regain her sense of humor and joked around a bit with Wu Peizhen, who remarked that Wang Qiyao looked like the Lady in the Moon descending into the secular world, whereupon Wang Qiyao quipped that if she were a Lady in the Moon, she was the kind whose image was found on boxes of mooncakes. The two of them had a good laugh.
Once this happened, Wang Qiyao's expression relaxed, her powdered face lit up, and she came to life.
As she returned the gaze of the beauty in the mirror, the image she saw no longer seemed quite as distant and unrecognizable.
Before long the director sent someone over to escort Wang Qiyao to the set, Wu Peizhen naturally following close behind.
The lights were already set up and Wu Peizhen's cousin was up on the scaffolding, smiling down at them. The director, on the other hand, became serious and cold, as if he did not even know them. He had Wang Qiyao sit on a bed. It was a Nanjing-style bed with ornate flower patterns carved into the woodwork, a mirror set into the headboard, and high bed curtains all around—all the signs of rustic elegance.
Wang Qiyao was to play a bride in a traditional wedding ceremony. She would be wearing a crimson bridal veil over her head when the groom entered and he would pull it away, slowly revealing her face.
The director explained that her character had to be bashful and charming, filled with longing and uncertainty; he unloaded these adjectives on her all at once, expecting her to capture them all with a single expression.
Wang Qiyao nodded, but deep down she was completely lost and had no idea where to begin.
But having decided to let everything ride, she was actually quite calm and composed. She was aware of everything going on around her, down to the shouts of "Camera" coming from the adjacent set.
The next thing she knew, a crimson bridal veil came down over her head. Suddenly everything was swathed in darkness.
In that instant her heart began pounding like a drum.
She understood that her moment had come and fear welled up inside her as her knees began to tremble faintly.
The set lights came on, transforming the darkness into a thick crimson hue.
Suddenly she felt feverish, and the tremors worked their way from her knees up through her body. Even her teeth began to chatter.
All the mystery and grandeur of the film studio hung suspended in the light shimmering outside her veil.
Someone came and straightened out her clothing and then quickly walked off set. The air whisked against her as he passed by. The crimson veil fluttered a bit, for a moment softening the anxieties of that afternoon.
She heard a series of "okay"s repeating in rhythmic succession around her, as if converging upon a common target. Finally came the word, "Camera."
Wang Qiyao's breathing stopped. She could not catch her breath. She could hear the film running through the camera, a mechanical sound that seemed to override everything. Her mind just went blank.
When a hand pulled away her wedding veil, she was so startled that she shrank back with fright. "Cut," the director yelled.
The set lights went dim, the crimson veil went back over her head, and they took it once more from the top.
As they redid the scene, everything grew fuzzy.
Things faded off into the distance, never to reappear, as if they had been an illusion.
Then Wang Qiyao snapped out of her daze, her shivering ceased, and her heart rate returned to normal.
Her eyes adjusted to the darkness once more and through the wedding veil she could make out silhouettes of people moving around.
The set lights came up and this time the shouts of "OK" sounded perfunctory. When the word "Camera" was called out, it too seemed little more than a formality—but this formality still carried with it an air of authority, of unwavering power.
She began to prepare the emotions the director wanted to see on her face; the only problem was that she had no inkling of how to act bashful or charming, or what it meant to be filled with longing and uncertainty.
Human emotions are not simple symbols that can be called up at will.
The crimson wedding veil was lifted to reveal a rigid expression; even the bit of natural charm that she normally had about her was frozen.
As soon as he saw her through the eye of the camera, the director sensed that he had made a mistake; Wang Qiyao's was not an artistic beauty, but quite ordinary. It was the kind of beauty to be admired in by close friends and relatives in her own living room, like the shifting moods of everyday life; a retrained beauty, it was not the kind that made waves.
It was real, not dramatic—the kind of beauty that people noticed on the street and photo studios displayed in their front windows.
Through the camera's lens, it was simply too bland.
The director was disappointed, but his disappointment was partly for Wang Qiyao's sake. Her beauty will be buried and lost to the world, he said to himself.
Later, in order to make things up to her, he had a photographer friend of his do a photo shoot for her—but this photo shoot turned into something quite extraordinary. One of the photos even made it into the inside front cover of Shanghai Life with the caption, "A Proper Young Lady of Shanghai."
And so that is how the screen test ended, just another trifling incident in the life of the film studio.
After that, Wang Qiyao stopped going. She wanted to forget the whole affair—that it had ever happened.
But the image of that crimson wedding veil and the dazzling studio lights were already imprinted in her mind and reappeared whenever she closed her eyes.
There was a strange frisson attached to that scene; it was the most dramatic moment in Wang Qiyao's quiet life.
The moment had come and gone in an instant, but it added a dab of melancholic color to her heart.
Occasionally, on her way home from school, something would unexpectedly stir up her memory of the screen test.
Wang Qiyao was sixteen years old at the time, but that one day's experience left her with the feeling that she had already been through a lot—she felt much older than sixteen.
She started to avoid Wu Peizhen, as if the latter had stolen some secret from her.
Whenever Wu Peizhen invited her out after school, Wang Qiyao would almost always find some excuse not to go.
Several times Wu Peizhen even went to Wang Qiyao's apartment to look for her, but each time Wang Qiyao had the maidservant say that she was not home.
Sensing that she was being avoided, Wu Peizhen felt heartbroken, but she held on to the hope that Wang Qiyao would eventually come back to her.
Her friendship changed into a kind of pious waiting; she did not even look for any new girlfriends, afraid that they might take Wang Qiyao's place.
Wu Peizhen had a faint notion that the reason Wang Qiyao was avoiding her had something to do with that failed screen test, so she too stopped going to the film studio, even breaking off contact with her cousin.
The screen test became a source of sorrow for both of them, leaving them with a deep sense of defeat.
Things gradually got to the point where they were no longer on speaking terms: running into one another at school, each would make haste to awkwardly get out of the other's way.
They sat on opposite sides of the classroom, but, though their eyes never met, they could always feel one another's' presence. A wall of pity grew between them.
The incident at the film studio ended with the word "camera," and the result was what they call in the industry a "freeze frame." Gone, never to return, but the memory hangs on for all eternity.
Their after-school lives gradually returned to normal; but things were not really the same—something had been snatched away. They were hurt, but neither could say where the pain was.
At their girls' school, where rumors usually flew rampant, not a soul knew about Wang Qiyao's screen test; they had succeeded in keeping it completely under wraps.
It was implicitly understood between them that they should never broach the subject.
Actually, just to be chosen by a director for a screen test would already have been a great honor in the eyes of most girls—any hopes of getting a part would be a long shot in a long shot.
This was also what Wang Qiyao thought at first, but once she reached that stage everything changed. Suddenly, a price had been exacted and loss was imminent.
Only because Wu Peizhen stepped out of her own shoes and empathized completely with her friend was she able to understand the grief Wang Qiyao was going through.
Peace Lane
SHANGHAI MUST HAVE at least a hundred Peace Lanes, some occupying a large area connecting two major streets, others connected to other longtang, forming a vast network of twisted, dirty lanes where one can easily get lost.
As confusing as they may be to outsiders, each has developed a distinct identity simply through having survived for so many years.
Under moonlight, these blocks of crumbling wood and brick look positively serene, like something out of a painting executed with minute brushstrokes; they too hold memories and aspirations.
The ringing bells make their evening rounds, reminding residents to watch their cooking fires, evincing a trace of warmth and goodwill from those who live there.
Mornings, however, begin with night-soil carts, clattering in to collect waste for fertilizer, and the raspy noises of brushes scrubbing out commodes. Amid the smoke of coal burners, laundry soaked overnight is taken out to be hung, banner-like, on bamboo poles.
Every action, every gesture comes across to the onlooker as a boastful swagger or perhaps an exaggerated fit of pique; why, the collective provocation would be enough to darken the rising sun.
Each Peace Lane has a few residents who are as old as the neighborhood. Being history's witnesses, they observe newcomers with knowing eyes.
Some are not averse to mingling with newcomers, and this creates an impression of continuity.
But on the whole they like to keep to themselves, adding an air of mystery to the neighborhood.
Wang Qiyao moved into the third floor of 39 Peace Lane.
Different batches of tenants had left their plants on the balcony. Most had withered, but a few nameless ones had sprouted new leaves.
Insects swam in the stagnant liquid of moldy jars in the kitchen, yet among them was a bottle of perfectly good peanut oil.
On the wall behind the door somebody had written, "Buy birthday present on January 10," and a child had scrawled "Wang Gensheng eats shit." One could only speculate about the birthday celebrant and the object of the child's resentment.
Rubbish lay, piled up at haphazard—one could make nothing coherent out of all this.
Having put her things down among other people's debris, Wang Qiyao decided to make the place her own by hanging up her curtains.
The room did seem different with the curtains.
However, with no shade over the light bulb, the objects in the room simply looked naked rather than illuminated.
Outside it was a typical evening in May. The warm breeze carried with it whiffs of grease and swill, which was the basic odor of Shanghai, although the typical Shanghainese was so steeped in it he scarcely noticed.
Later in the night would come the scent of rice gruel flavored with osmanthus blossoms. The smells were familiar, the curtains were familiar, and the evening outside was familiar, but Wang Qiyao felt strange. She needed to reattach herself to life here; fortunately for her, the lines where attachments could be made were clearly marked on the fabric.
Wang Qiyao was grateful to the large flowers on the curtains, which, no matter where they were placed, remained in full bloom, faithfully retaining the glory of bygone days.
The floor and the window frames emitted the odiferous warmth of decaying wood. Scurrying mice conveyed their greetings.
Soon, bells reminding people to watch their cooking fires began ringing.
Wang Qiyao underwent three months of training as a nurse in order to be certified to give injections. She hung out a sign advertising injections outside the entrance to her apartment on Peace Lane.
Similar signs could be seen along the entrances of other longtang—following those signs inside, one could find Wang Qiyaos of all different shapes and sizes eking out a living.
They all woke up early, put on clean clothes, and straightened up their rooms. Then they ignited the alcohol burner to disinfect a box of needles.
The sun, reflected from the rooftops across the alley, left rectangles of light on the wooden floor.
After switching off the burner, they reached for a book to read while they waited for patients.
The patients tended to come in batches, morning and afternoon, but there might be one or two in the evening.
Once in a while, when someone requested a house call, they hurried off in white cap and surgical mask. Lugging a straw bag containing the needles and medicinal cotton, they looked very much like professional nurses as they scurried down the street.
Wang Qiyao always wore a simple cheongsam. In the 1950s these were becoming rare on the streets of Shanghai, a symbol of nostalgia as well as style, at once old-fashioned and modern.
When she crossed the streets on house calls, she was often struck by a sense of déjà vu—the places were familiar, only the roles were changed.
One day she called on a patient in a dark apartment where the waxed floor reflected her shoes and stockings, and was led into the bedroom. There, under a green silk blanket, a young woman lay. Wang Qiyao had the curious sensation that the woman was herself.
Having administered the shot, she put her things away and left, but her heart seemed to tarry in that apartment.
She could almost hear the woman complaining to the maid that the shrimps from the market were too small and not fresh enough—didn't she know the master would be home for dinner that night?
At times she stared into the blue flames of the alcohol burner and saw a resplendent world in which people sang and danced for all eternity.
Once in a while she caught a late movie, one of the ones that started at eight, when street lamps were reflected on the face of the silent streets. Only the theater lobby would be bustling, as though time had stood still.
She only went to old movies: Zhou Xuan in Street Angel, Bai Yang in Crossroads, and others. Although they had no connection to her present situation, they were familiar and they spoke to her.
She subscribed to an evening newspaper to fill the hours of dusk. She read every word in the newspaper, making sense perhaps of half the reports. By the time she finished it, the water would be boiling and it would be dinner time.
There was an exciting element of unpredictability to her work. Hearing footsteps on the staircase at night, she would speculate, Who could it be?
She was unusually vivacious on these occasions and often talked a bit too much, asking this or that as she reignited the alcohol burner to sterilize the needle. If the patient was a child, she would put out all her charm. She would feel sad after the patient left.
Pondering over the recent commotion, she would forget to put things away, and then discover that the pot had boiled dry.
Such interruptions in her tranquil routine gave rise to a vague feeling of anticipation.
Something was fomenting, she felt, from which something might just develop.
Once, awakened in the middle of the night by urgent and frightened calls for help at the door, she threw a jacket over her nightgown and rushed downstairs, her heart pounding, to find two men from the provinces carrying someone on a stretcher. The person was critically ill.
They had mistaken her for a doctor.
After giving them directions to the nearest hospital, she went back upstairs but could not sleep a wink.
All kinds of odd things happened in the night in this city.
Under the lamp at the entrance to the longtang, the shingle advertising "Injection Nurse Wang Qiyao" looked as if it was waiting patiently to be noticed.
The passing cars and the windswept fallen leaves hinted at concealed activities in the dark night.
People came to Wang Qiyao in an unending parade. Those who stopped coming were quickly replaced by others.
She would speculate about her patients' professions and backgrounds and was pleased to find most of her guesses correct as, with a few casual remarks, she pried the facts out of them.
Her best sources were nannies accompanying little charges—these eagerly volunteered all kinds of unflattering information about their employers.
A number of patients had nothing wrong with them, but came for routine health-enhancing shots, such as placenta fluid.
They became so comfortable with her that they would drop by to gossip.
Thus, without going out of her house, Wang Qiyao learned a great deal about the neighborhood.
This hodgepodge of activity was enough to fill up half her day.
Sometimes she was so busy she could hardly keep up with all the goings-on.
The hustle-bustle on Peace Lane was both invasive and highly contagious. Wang Qiyao's tranquility gradually gave way to frequent footfalls on the stairs, doors opening and shutting; her name was regularly hollered by people on the ground with upturned heads, their fervent voices carrying far and wide on quiet afternoons.
Before long, the oleanders, planted haphazardly in makeshift planters formed from broken bricks on balconies, put forth their dazzling flowers.
Nothing marvelous had happened to Wang Qiyao, but through careful cultivation her life had also sprouted countless little sprigs that held the promise of developing into something.
People at Peace Lane knew Wang Qiyao as a young widow. Several attempts were made to match her up with men, including a teacher who, though only thirty, was already bald.
Arrangements were made for them to meet at a theater to watch a movie about victorious peasants—the kind of thing she detested—but she forced herself to sit through it.
Whenever there was a lull in the show, she heard a faint whistling sound coming from the man as he breathed.
Seeing this was the best she could do, she declined all further matchmaking efforts on her behalf.
As she watched the smoky sky above Peace Lane, she often wondered if anything exciting would ever happen to her again.
To charges of arrogance as well as to praise for being loyal to her late husband, she turned a deaf ear. She ignored all gossip and advice, remaining at once genial and distant. This was normal on Peace Lane, where friendships were circumscribed, there being untold numbers of large fish swimming around in the murky waters.
Underneath all that conviviality, people were lonely, though often they did not know it themselves, merely muddling through from one day to the next.
Wang Qiyao was rather muddleheaded about some things, while she couldn't have been more clear-sighted about others; the former concerned issues of daily living, while the latter were reserved for her private thoughts.
She was occupied with people and things during the day. At night, after she turned off the lights and the moonlight lit up the big flowers on the curtains, she could not help but slip into deep thought.
There was a great deal of thinking going on around Peace Lane, but much of it, like sediment, had sunk to the bottom of people's hearts, all the juice squeezed out of them, so that they had solidified and could no longer be stirred up.
Wang Qiyao had not reached this stage. Her thoughts still had stems, leaves, and flowers, which glimmered in the dark night of Peace Lane.
A Frequent Guest
Among Wang Qiyao's frequent visitors was one Madame Yan, who came quite regularly.
She lived in a townhouse with a private entrance at the end of Peace Lane.
She must have been thirty-six or thirty-seven years old, as her eldest son, an architecture student at Tongji University, was already nineteen.
Her husband had owned a light bulb factory that, since 1949, was jointly operated with the state. He was now the deputy manager—a mere figurehead, according to Madame Yan.
Madame Yan painted her eyebrows and wore lipstick even on days when she didn't leave the house. She favored a short green Chinese jacket over a pair of Western-style pants made of cheviot wool.
When they saw her coming, people stopped talking and turned to stare, but she acted as if they did not exist.
Her children did not play with the other kids, and, since her husband was driven everywhere by a chauffeur, few people really knew what he looked like.
There was a high turnover among their servants; in any case, they were not permitted to loiter when they went out for errands, so they, too, appeared aloof.
Every Monday and Thursday Madame Yan would come for a shot of imported vitamins to help her ward off colds.
The first time she saw Wang Qiyao, she was taken aback.
Her clothes, the way she ate, her every move and gesture, hinted of a splendid past.
Madame Yan decided they could be friends.
She had always felt Peace Lane was beneath her. Her husband, a frugal person, had bought the property at a good price.
In response to her complaints, he had, in bed, promised many times to move them to a house with a garden. Now that their assets were controlled by the government, they felt lucky simply to be allowed to keep their house.
Still, as long as she lived in Peace Lane, Madame Yan felt like a crane among chickens. No one there was her equal and, in her eyes, even the neighbors were no better than her servants.
She was therefore delighted to see another woman similarly out of place moving into no. 39.
Without seeking Wang Qiyao's permission, she made herself a regular visitor.
Madame Yan usually showed up in the afternoon sometime after two o'clock, heralded by the fragrance of scented powder and her sandalwood fan.
Most of Wang Qiyao's patients came between three and four o'clock, so they had an hour to kill. Sitting across from each other in the lazy summer afternoon, they would stifle their yawns and chatter on without fully realizing what they were talking about, as cicadas droned in the parasol tree at the entrance to the longtang.
Wang Qiyao would ladle out some of her chilled plum soup, which they sipped absentmindedly while exchanging gossip.
Then, having thrown off their afternoon sluggishness and cooled off, they would perk up.
Madame Yan did most of the talking while Wang Qiyao listened, but both were equally absorbed in the conversation.
Madame Yan would go on and on, passing from stories about her parents to gossip about her in-laws; actually, all she wanted was to hear herself talk.
As for Wang Qiyao, she listened with her heart and eventually made all business concerning the Yan family her own.
When, once in a while, Madame Yan inquired about Wang Qiyao's family, she always answered in the vaguest terms. She suspected Madame Yan didn't believe most of what she said, but that was fine—she was free to speculate. Wang Qiyao would much rather that Madame Yan guessed the truth but left things discreetly unsaid; but Madame Yan, who had to some extent figured out the situation, insisted on asking questions pointblank. It was her way of testing Wang Qiyao's sincerity.
Wang Qiyao, for her part, wanted to be sincere, but there were some things that simply could not be spoken aloud.
So they went around in circles, one chasing and the other evading, and before they knew it, a grudge had grown up between them.
Fortunately, grudges are no impediment to friendships between women. The friendships of women are made of grudges: the deeper the grudge, the deeper the friendship.
Sometimes they parted acrimoniously, but would resume their friendship the very next day with a deeper understanding of each other.
One day Madame Yan announced that she wanted to set Wang Qiyao up with someone, but Wang Qiyao declined with a good-humored laugh.
When Madame Yan inquired into the reason, Wang Qiyao simply recounted the scene at the movie theater with the schoolteacher.
Madame Yan laughed out loud but then continued with a straight face, "I'll promise you three things about the guy I want to introduce you to. One, I'll make sure he's not a teacher; two, that he's still got a head of hair; and three, that he doesn't have asthma." They both collapsed in laughter, but that was the last time Madame Yan brought up the topic of matchmaking. They came to a tacit understanding that the subject would not be broached and they would simply let nature take its course.
Both being still young and bright, their sensitivity had not yet been ground down by time, and they quickly understood how each other felt.
Although there was a ten-year difference between them, Madame Yan acted a bit young for her age and Wang Qiyao was more mature, so they were well-suited.
People like them, who become friends at mid-life, tend to keep part of themselves hidden away. Even Madame Yan, who usually wore her heart on her sleeve, retained certain secrets that she herself might not have understood. It was not necessary for them to know everything there was to know about each other—a little sympathy went a long way.
And even though Madame Yan was not satisfied, she could bear it and still treat Wang Qiyao as a true friend.
What Madame Yan had was time on her hands. Her husband left early every morning and did not get home until late at night. Two of her children were grown, while the third was cared for by a nanny. She socialized with the wives of other industrialists and businessmen, but this hardly took up all her time.
Dropping by to see Wang Qiyao became part of her daily routine; she sometimes even stayed for dinner, insisting that they simply eat what was already on hand rather than doing anything fancy.
Consequently, they often had leftover rice, heated up again with just a dish of mud snails to go with it.
Wang Qiyao's near-ascetic lifestyle reminded Madame Yan of her own simple, quiet life before marriage, which seemed so long ago.
If a patient came while they were talking, Madame Yan would help by bringing over a chair, getting the medicine out, and collecting the money.
More than once the patient thought the well-dressed woman was Wang Qiyao's younger sister, which caused her to blush with pleasure, as if she were a child being patted on the head by an adult.
Afterward she would in a self-deprecating tone urge Wang Qiyao to get some new clothes and have her hair permed.
She spoke eloquently about how a woman must treasure her youth and beauty, which would disappear before she knew it.
This never failed to touch Wang Qiyao, who, at twenty-five, was indeed watching her youth slip by.
Madame Yan's outfits were always new and fashionable, but that was all she could do to hold on to the tail end of her youth.
At times her appearance startled and touched Wang Qiyao.
There was an innocence about her heavy makeup and also a certain world-weariness, blended together to create a desolate kind of beauty.
Eventually, unable to withstand Madame Yan's blandishments, Wang Qiyao went out and got herself a perm.
The smell of shampoo, lotion, and burning hair was intimately familiar to Wang Qiyao, as was the image of a woman sitting under the hair dryer, one hand holding a magazine, the other extended to be pampered by a manicurist.
The routines of washing, cutting, rolling, perming, drying, and setting had long been imprinted on her mind.
She felt like she had been there just the day before, surrounded by faces she knew.
When the process was completed, the old Wang Qiyao emerged in the mirror—the intervening three years seemed to have been snipped off along with her split ends.
Looking into the mirror, she noted Madame Yan's face, on which was a mixture of astonishment and envy.
As the stylist gave her hair a last-minute adjustment with a hand blower, the expression on Wang Qiyao's face, turning slightly to avoid the hot air with just a soupçon of the spoiled child, belonged to yesteryear.
Childbirth
ONE DAY MR. CHENG went to Wang Qiyao's after work to find her pale and flustered, lying down every so often and then getting up to pace around. She even knocked over a glass, which shattered on the floor, but didn't bother to pick up the pieces.
Mr. Cheng hurried out to call a pedicab, came back in to help her downstairs, and then rushed them off to the hospital.
Having arrived at the hospital, she seemed to improve, and Mr. Cheng went out to get something for their dinner.
By the time he got back, Wang Qiyao had already been taken into the delivery room. It was a baby girl. She was born at eight o'clock. They told Mr. Cheng that she had long arms and legs and a full head of black hair.
This set him wondering, Just who does she look like?
When, three days later, he brought mother and daughter home from the hospital, the threesome attracted quite a few curious stares down the longtang.
Mr. Cheng had fetched Wang Qiyao's mother the day before, setting up a place for her on the sofa, and even going to the trouble of preparing a set of toiletries.
Mrs. Wang was silent the whole time, but, as Mr. Cheng busied himself with the household chores, she blurted out, "If only you had been the child's father . . ."
Mr. Cheng trembled and almost lost hold of the things in his hands. He wanted to say something but his throat had closed up. By the time he was able to speak, he had forgotten what to say. So he simply pretended that he had not heard.
When Wang Qiyao came home the next day, her mother had already prepared a pot of chicken broth and the customary bowl of soup with red jujube and longan, which was supposed to be so nourishing for new mothers. She handed the bowl to her daughter in silence. She did not bother to even look at her granddaughter; it was as if the child did not exist.
Neighbors began to call on them, but they were only the most casual of acquaintances—the only contact they normally had with Wang Qiyao was waving hello as she went in and out of the longtang; now they came out of curiosity.
Each one went on about how much the baby looked like Wang Qiyao, all the while wondering who the father was.
Going into the kitchen to fetch the hot water Thermos, Mr. Cheng found Mrs. Wang standing in front of the window, looking out at the overcast sky and quietly wiping away the tears.
Mr. Cheng had always thought her a calculating woman. Back when he used to call on Wang Qiyao, she would never even bother to greet him but always sent the maid down to talk to him at the door instead.
Now, he sensed, she was much closer to him, perhaps more understanding and sympathetic even than her daughter.
He stood behind her for a moment before offering a timid attempt at consolation. "Don't worry, Auntie. I'll take care of her."
With those words he could feel the tears welling up and hastened back into the room with the hot water thermos.
The next day Madame Yan, who had not visited for ages, came to see Wang Qiyao. She had long heard of the pregnancy from her servant Mama Zhang, who had seen Wang Qiyao coming and going with that protruding belly of hers; Wang Qiyao obviously wasn't worried about the rumors her pregnancy might stir up.
Kang Mingxun and Sasha had by this time long vanished from the scene, one hiding out at home while the other fled far away. Then, out of nowhere, appeared this Mr. Cheng, who suddenly started coming by at least three times a day.
Although Madame Yan wasn't exactly sure what had transpired, she wasn't in the least bit taken off guard; in fact, she fancied herself one imbued with keen insights into the situation of women like Wang Qiyao. Still, she was intrigued by Mr. Cheng.
She could tell from the fine quality of the old suit he wore that this Mr. Cheng had been a stylish man back in the old days.
She took him to be some kind of playboy whom Wang Qiyao must have known back in her dance hall days. Madame Yan imagined all kinds of things about Mr. Cheng.
She had run into him a few times in the alley: he was always on his way to Wang Qiyao's with snacks like "stinky tofu," and would always rush briskly past lest the food get cold. The grease from the tofu had already soaked the bottom of the bag and was about to drip through.
Madame Yan was touched, even somewhat jealous of Wang Qiyao for having such a devoted friend.
Hearing that Wang Qiyao had given birth, she was moved to sympathy; being a woman, she could relate to how difficult things must have been for Wang Qiyao, and decided to go over to see how she was.
Mrs. Wang, sensing that Madame Yan was a cut above the others, felt favored by the visit and tried to make herself pleasant. She even brewed some tea and sat down with Madame Yan.
With Mr. Cheng away at work, these three women of different generations compared notes about the hardships of childbirth.
Wang Qiyao mostly just sat and listened, as if the shady circumstances surrounding the father of her child prevented her from claiming her share of the glory.
Her mother and Madame Yan, on the other hand, vividly recalled every detail from earlier decades.
When Mrs. Wang started to speak about how hard it was giving birth to Wang Qiyao, the irony of the present situation was not lost on her and her eyes reddened. She quickly found an excuse to scurry off into the kitchen, leaving the other two in an awkward silence.
The baby had just been fed and was deep in sleep, her outline barely visible in the candle light.
Wang Qiyao had been looking down as she picked her fingernails, but she abruptly raised her head and laughed.
It was a tragic laugh that affected even Madame Yan.
"Madame Yan, I really appreciate you coming to see me . . . especially after all that's happened. I was worried you would look down on me," Wang Qiyao said.
"Oh, cut it out, Wang Qiyao!" replied Madame Yan. "Nobody is looking down on you!
I'm calling on Kang Mingxun in a few days and I'm going to see to it that he comes to see you."
At the mention of his name, Wang Qiyao turned away. It was only after a long silence that she replied, "That's right, it's been ages since I've seen him."
Madame Yan grew suspicious, but was forced to keep her thoughts to herself; instead she casually suggested that they all get together again. "It's a pity that Sasha's no longer around. He must be off in Siberia eating his Russian bread! But that's okay, you can bring along that new friend of yours and we'll have a foursome for our mahjong games."
She took the opportunity to ask Wang Qiyao the gentleman's name, his age, where he was from, and where he worked, all of which Wang Qiyao responded to matter-of-factly. At that point Madame Yan asked bluntly, "He is so loyal to you, and neither of you is getting any younger.... Why don't you just get married?"
Wang Qiyao responded with another laugh. Raising her head, she looked Madame Yan straight in the eye. "A woman like me. . . . How could I talk of marriage?"
The next day, Kang Mingxun indeed came by to call on Wang Qiyao.
Although she had expected him to show up after Madame Yan's visit, she was still caught by surprise.
Standing there face to face, neither knew what to say.
Mrs. Wang sized up the situation and decided it was best to give them some privacy, but slammed the door shut on her way out to register her disapproval.
But Wang Qiyao and Kang Mingxun didn't even notice.
This was the first time they had been together since their parting. It felt like thousands of years since they had last seen each other.
They had appeared in each other's dreams, but the images in their dreams were so far from the real person that they would have been better off not even dreaming.
They had, in truth, resolved not to think of each other—and succeeded. But, face to face once again, they discovered that letting go was not as easy as they had thought.
They stood there for a moment before Kang Mingxun walked around to the other side of the bed to take a look at the baby.
Wang Qiyao stopped him. When he asked why he shouldn't see the baby, she said, "Because I said so. . . ."
Kang Mingxun pressed for an explanation. Wang Qiyao said that it wasn't his baby.
They fell silent for a while before he said, "Well, whose is it then, if it isn't mine?"
"Sasha's."
At that, the two of them broke down in tears.
All the sorrow they had suppressed back when they had to make that difficult decision suddenly came rushing back; they wondered how they had ever got through everything that had brought them to this point.
"I'm so sorry . . . I'm so sorry. . . ." Kang Mingxun kept apologizing, knowing it would do no good even if he said it a thousand times over.
Wang Qiyao kept shaking her head, aware that if she did not accept the apology, she would have nothing at all.
They were both in tears, but it was Wang Qiyao who stopped crying first. Wiping away her tears, she insisted, "She really is Sasha's child."
Hearing her say this, Kang Mingxun also pulled back his tears and sat himself down. There was no more mention of the baby; it was as if she had ceased to exist.
Wang Qiyao had Kang Mingxun make himself some tea and, as he busied himself, she asked him what he had been doing of late—did he still play bridge? Was there any news on the job front?
"For the past few months, it feels like I have been doing only one thing—waiting in line.
I get in line at nine thirty every morning to get into the Chinese restaurant. Then I line up again around four at a Western restaurant. Sometimes I have to line up just to get a cup of coffee or a quick bite, like a bowl of rice with salted pork."
He explained that he was the one who usually got stuck holding a place in line for the rest of the family; once it got to close to his turn, everyone else would show up.
"Everyone talks about there not being enough to eat, but I feel like all I do all day long is eat!"
Wang Qiyao took a closer look at him and jokingly observed, "You've been eating so much that you're starting to grow gray."
"I don't think that's from eating too much—it's from missing someone too much...."
Wang Qiyao rolled her eyes. "Oh no, I'm not singing Rendezvous at the Pavilion with you again!"
They seemed to have slipped back into their old ways—except that there was this new addition asleep on the bed.
Sparrows were pecking at crumbs on the windowsill and they could hear someone forcefully shaking out a comforter on a nearby balcony.
Kang Mingxun was just on his way out as Mr. Cheng came back from work. Passing on the stairs, they exchanged a quick glance but neither left much of an impression on the other.
It wasn't until he got inside that Wang Qiyao explained that the man was her neighbor Madame Yan's cousin, the one she used to spend time with.
"It's almost dinner time. How come you didn't ask him to stay for dinner?" Mr. Cheng asked.
"We really don't have anything special to entertain a guest... so I thought it would be rude to invite him," she explained.
Mrs. Wang kept quiet but had a disgusted look on her face. She went out of her way to be nice to Mr. Cheng, who wondered who had crossed her—he knew it wasn't him.
As usual, he spent some time playing with the baby after dinner. Seeing the baby fed and contentedly asleep with her tiny fist in her mouth, he took his leave.
It was around eight o'clock. People and cars passed back and forth under the bright city lights.
Instead of taking the trolley, Mr. Cheng draped his fall coat over his arm and walked home.
He took in the familiar scents of the city and soaked up the evening scene.
Now that the burden weighing on him for so long had been finally lifted, he felt relaxed: mother and child were safe and sound and the baby didn't bother him as he had originally feared.
In fact, Mr. Cheng was struck with a peculiar happiness; it was as if he, and not the child, had been given a new lease on life.
The late show was about to begin at the cinemas, which added a feeling of excitement to the night air.
The city still had the spirit of a night owl, and the same energy of years ago was still there.
The tricolor revolving pole outside the barbershop was the emblem of this unsleeping city.
The strong aroma of Brazilian coffee wafting out of Old Chang's gives the impression that time is flowing backward.
How exciting the night is!
Desire and contentment abound and, despite the compromises that have to be made, everyone gives their all, living life to the fullest.
Mr. Cheng's eyes grew moist and a strange excitement welled up in his heart, the like of which he had not experienced in a long time.
The next time Kang Mingxun showed up, Mrs. Wang did not go into the kitchen to avoid him. She sat on the sofa reading a cartoon version of the Dream of the Red Chamber.
Wang Qiyao and Kang Mingxun couldn't help but feel awkward and fell back on making small talk about the weather.
When the baby woke up crying, Wang Qiyao asked Kang Mingxun to hand her a clean diaper. To her dismay, her mother got up and, taking the diaper out of Kang Mingxun's hand, scolded her. "How could you have the gentleman do this kind of thing?"
"I don't mind," explained Kang Mingxun. "It's not like I'm busy with anything else. . . ." "Right, let him help out," Wang Qiyao added.
Mrs. Wang drew a long face. "Don't you have any manners? How could you ask a gentleman like him to lay his hands on these filthy articles? He is decent enough to treat you with respect and come to visit; but don't take it as a sign that you can walk all over him. Show some tact!"
Stunned by the innuendo in her mother's sudden attack, Wang Qiyao burst into tears.
Mrs. Wang became even more incensed. She flung the diaper in her daughter's face, screaming, "I try to help you save face, but you just don't seem to care! You demean yourself, and it's all your own doing!
If you want to lead a life of shame, go ahead! Nobody's going to be able to help you if you don't help yourself!"
With that, Mrs. Wang also burst out crying.
Kang Mingxun was thoroughly bemused; he had no idea what had brought this on. Not knowing what else to do, he set about trying to mollify Mrs. Wang, "Please don't be upset, Auntie. You know that Wang Qiyao has a good heart. . . ."
His words made Mrs. Wang laugh. She turned to him, "Mister, you are very perceptive. Wang Qiyao does indeed have a good heart. She has no choice. Where would she be if she didn't have a good heart?"
Suddenly Kang Mingxun realized that he was the object of her wrath. He stepped back and stammered something inaudible.
At this point, the baby, whom no one had been tending to, began to howl.
Of the four people in the room, three were now in tears. Aghast at the chaos, Kang Mingxun felt impelled to say, "It is less than a month since Wang Qiyao gave birth. She should still be resting and we should try not to make her upset."
Mrs. Wang laughed coldly. "Oh, so Wang Qiyao should be resting this month, should she? That's funny, I didn't know. With no man around to rely on, how is she supposed to be able to rest? Will you explain that to me?"
Those words brought an abrupt end to Wang Qiyao's tears. When she had finished changing and feeding the baby, she said, "Mom, you said I lack tact; but what about you?
How do you think it looks when you say such things in front of our guest? After all, it's not as if he has anything to do with our family. You're the one who is demeaning me—and yourself! At any rate, I'll always be your daughter!"
Mrs. Wang was dumbstruck. By the time she was ready to respond, Wang Qiyao cut her off. "This gentleman has the decency to come by and pay his respects. I would never dream of making any unseemly demands on him—and neither should you! All my life I've had no one to rely on but myself; I make no other claims besides that. I'm sorry to have troubled you to help out during this difficult time, but I promise you that I will repay you for your trouble."
Her remarks were directed at her mother, but they were also meant for Kang Mingxun. Mother and daughter both fell silent for a time, until Ms. Wang wiped away her tears and murmured bleakly, "I see I've been worrying too much. Well, you are almost through your first month, and it looks like I'm no longer needed here."
Even as she spoke, she began to gather up her personal effects. Neither Wang Qiyao nor Kang Mingxun dared say a word to persuade her to stay. They watched in shock as she packed her things and placed a red envelope on the baby's chest. She went out the door and down the stairs; then they heard the sound of the downstairs door closing, and she was gone.
Inside the red envelope were 200 yuan and a gold pendant.
When Mr. Cheng arrived, he found Wang Qiyao out of bed cooking dinner in the kitchen.
He asked where Mrs. Wang had gone. Wang Qiyao told him that her father was not feeling well and, since it was already almost a month since the birth, she had persuaded her mother to go home to look after him.
Mr. Cheng noticed her swollen eyes and guessed that she had been crying, but he decided not to press her and simply let things go at that.
With Mrs. Wang gone, the mood that evening was a bit dull.
Wang Qiyao was not very talkative and answered Mr. Cheng's questions absentmindedly, leaving her guest rather down. Mr. Cheng sat off to one side and read the newspaper.
He read on for quite some time and the apartment grew quiet. He thought that Wang Qiyao must be asleep, but when he looked over he saw that she had propped her head against the pillow and was staring up at the ceiling, lost in thought.
He quietly approached to ask what she was thinking. The last thing he expected was for her to jerk back and ask him what he wanted.
There was alarm in her eyes and a distant look that made Mr. Cheng feel like a stranger. He retreated to the sofa and went on with reading his newspaper.
All of a sudden, rowdy noises broke out from the longtang outside. Opening the window to look out, Mr. Cheng saw that a crowd had gathered around a man holding up a weasel he had caught in his chicken coop.
After recounting the beast's crimes, the man carried it toward the entrance to the longtang with the crowd following close behind.
Mr. Cheng was about to close the window when he caught the scent of osmanthus blossoms in the air; it wasn't terribly strong, but the fragrance went straight to his heart.
He also noticed the narrow span of sky above Peace Lane—a deep, deep blue.
He felt exhilarated. Turning to Wang Qiyao, he said, "Let's have a banquet to celebrate the child's one-month birthday."
Wang Qiyao did not say anything at first. Then, breaking into a smile: "Is that cause for celebration?"
"Yes," Mr. Cheng said more earnestly. "A first-month birthday is always a happy and auspicious occasion!"
"What's so happy and auspicious about it?"
Mr. Cheng did not know how to answer. Although she had been the one to crush his excitement, he pitied her.
Wang Qiyao rolled over away from him. After a pause, she continued, "Let's not fuss over this one-month celebration. Let's simply make a few dishes, buy a bottle of wine, and invite Madame Yan and her cousin over. They have been good to me, coming to see me and all."
That was enough to put Mr. Cheng back in high spirits. He pondered what kind of soup and dishes they should serve. Wang Qiyao objected to virtually every one of his suggestions, and he had to start from scratch.
They became more animated as they argued back and forth about the menu and gradually things went back to normal.
On the afternoon of the dinner Mr. Cheng left work early to pick up the food for that evening. They put the baby to bed early and chatted as they cooked.
Mr. Cheng saw that Wang Qiyao was in a good mood, which also put him in a good mood. They arranged the cold dishes in a delightful pattern, garnishing the plate with purple radishes.
Wang Qiyao declared, "Mr. Cheng, you're not only a great photographer, but you can cook too!"
"And you didn't even mention what I'm best at . . ."
"What's that?"
"Railroad engineering."
"I practically forgot your true calling. You see, all along you have been entertaining us with your hobbies, and hiding your real talent!"
"It's not that I was trying to hide it.... I just never get the chance to show it off!"
Their jovial banter was interrupted by the guests, who had come bearing gifts.
Madame Yan brought a pound of cashmere yarn, and Kang Mingxun a pair of gold ingots.
Wang Qiyao wanted to tell him that he shouldn't have given such an expensive gift, but was worried that Madame Yan would take that as a sign that her gift wasn't lavish enough, so she decided to accept them both and save her misgivings for another day.
Everyone went inside to see the baby before dinner and they all commented on how precious she looked. Since there were four of them, it worked out perfectly when they sat down at the table, one person on each side.
This was the first time that Mr. Cheng had met the evening's guests.
Madame Yan had taken note of him, but he had never noticed her, and he had only passed Kang Mingxun on the staircase, when neither could get a good look at the other.
Wang Qiyao made the introductions and they proceeded with dinner as if they were all acquainted.
Madame Yan already had a good impression of Mr. Cheng and was especially friendly toward him; it wasn't long before she felt like they were old friends.
Although Mr. Cheng was a bit overwhelmed by her warmth, he realized she had nothing but the best intentions.
Kang Mingxun, on the other hand, was stiff and subdued. He said little, focusing on the warm rice wine. They finished off the first bottle rather quickly and started on a second.
Mr. Cheng excused himself so he could go to the kitchen to prepare another dish, but seeing he was a bit tipsy, Wang Qiyao put her hand on his shoulder, motioning him to sit back down, and insisted that she take care of it.
He gently caressed the hand on his shoulder, but she instinctively pulled it away.
Kang Mingxun, in spite of himself, flashed Mr. Cheng a rather sharp glance.
The effect on Mr. Cheng was instantaneously sobering.
Wang Qiyao returned to the table with the new dish she had just whipped up.
By then even Madame Yan, whose cheeks were red, was getting a bit tipsy.
She proposed a toast to Mr. Cheng, declaring him a rare gentleman and even quoting the old adage, "It's easier to find ten thousand ounces of gold than a true friend who can really understand you."
Her words were inappropriate to the occasion; obviously, alcohol was bringing out some hidden truths.
Not content to propose a toast on her own, she insisted that Kang Mingxun also drink to Mr. Cheng.
Kang Mingxun raised his cup but didn't know quite what to say. As the rest of the party waited anxiously, he finally came out with something that sounded even more inappropriate. "Here's to Mr. Cheng soon finding matrimonial bliss!"
Mr. Cheng accepted their toast with equanimity and a "thank you." Then, turning to Wang Qiyao, he asked if she had anything to say.
Wang Qiyao was a bit disconcerted by the unfamiliar glint in his eyes—she wasn't sure if it was the alcohol or something else—so she put on a placating smile.
"Naturally, I should have been the first one to toast Mr. Cheng. Just as Madame Yan said, it is easier to find ten thousand ounces of gold than a true friend. No one else here understands me the way Mr. Cheng does. He has always been there for me during my most difficult times. And for all the mistakes I have made, he has always forgiven me. I owe him a debt of gratitude that I will never be able to repay."
Conscious that it was the alcohol that had emboldened her to open up, Mr. Cheng couldn't help being at once deeply disappointed and hurt by her words; all she spoke of was gratitude, with not a word about love. On the brink of tears, he lowered his head. Only after a long pause did he manage to force a smile and say, "Hey, we're not here to celebrate my one-month birthday! Why is everyone toasting me? Drinking to Wang Qiyao would be more like it!"
And so, with Madame Yan leading the way, they all toasted Wang Qiyao.
But, perhaps because they had all talked too much already, no one had much left to say. So they just drank, one cup after another.
Mr. Cheng's eyes met Kang Mingxun's once again. They stared mutely at each other, neither fully understanding the circumstances. But the seeds of suspicion had been planted.
Everyone drank more than they should have that evening. Mr. Cheng couldn't remember how he had seen the guests out or whether he had washed the dishes after they left. He woke up to discover himself on Wang Qiyao's sofa, a thin blanket draped over him. Leftover food was still on the table, and the room was filled with the sweet and sour fragrance of rice wine.
The moon shining through the curtains on his face was cool as water.
He felt utterly at peace as he watched the moonlight dancing on the curtain; he decided to let his mind go blank and not worry about anything that had happened that night.
Suddenly he heard a gentle voice ask, "Would you care for some tea?"
He followed the voice and saw Wang Qiyao lying in bed across the room. She had also woken up, but her face was obscured by the shadows and Mr. Cheng could only make out her silhouette.
Mr. Cheng did not feel awkward; on the contrary, he was filled with a sense of serenity. "I'm so embarrassed!" he said.
Wang Qiyao responded with a silent laugh. "You fell asleep with your head on the table. It took the three of us to get you onto the sofa."
"I drank too much," he said. "But that was only because I was happy."
After a silence, Wang Qiyao responded, "Actually . . . you drank so much because you were upset. . . ."
Mr. Cheng laughed. "What's there for me to be upset about?
I was really happy."
Neither of them spoke and gradually the moonlight shifted a bit closer.
Bathed in the moonlight, Mr. Cheng had the sensation that he was lying in water.
Quite some time passed, and he was certain that Wang Qiyao must have long fallen asleep, when she suddenly called out his name. He was surprised to hear her call him.
"What is it?"
Wang Qiyao hesitated before asking, "Can't you get to sleep?"
"I think I got all the sleep I needed when I passed out earlier!"
"That's not what I meant. . . ."
"I think I know quite well what you meant," insisted Mr. Cheng.
"I don't think so. . . ."
Mr. Cheng laughed, "Of course I do."
"If you understand what I meant, then why don't you tell me...?"
"If that's what you want, I will then," replied Mr. Cheng. "You meant that all this time we have been but just one step away from taking our relationship somewhere else. And if I were to take that step, you would not refuse me."
Wang Qiyao marveled at Mr. Cheng's perceptiveness, especially since he usually came off so stiff and bookish. Embarrassed, she tried to find an excuse to explain things away. "I know I don't deserve you . . . and that's why I wanted to wait for you to make the first move."
Mr. Cheng laughed again. He felt extremely relaxed, as if floating on air. When he spoke, it felt almost as if someone else was doing the talking, but the words that came out were indeed his deepest and most honest inner thoughts.
"We talked about taking that one last step. . . . Well, I have been waiting practically half my life to take that step. But it's not as easy as it sounds. Have you ever heard the saying, 'People can be a short distance away, yet poles apart'?
There are a lot of things in life that simply can't be forced."
Wang Qiyao remained silent and Mr. Cheng, unconcerned as to whether she was really listening, continued to pour out the feelings he had accumulated inside himself all those years.
He explained how he had long ago come to understand this principle. So long as they could be close friends, confidants, he thought, his life would not have been in vain. But once people are together, it is as the saying goes: "A boat sailing against the current must forge ahead or else be driven back." "I would be lying if I said that I didn't have the desire to forge ahead . . . but when the boat won't go forward anymore . . . all I can do is turn back."
After a long silence, he suddenly asked, "Kang Mingxun is the father, isn't he?"
Wang Qiyao laughed, "What does it matter whether he is or not?"
Mr. Cheng grew a bit self-conscious. "I was only asking."
The two of them turned over, away from each other, and before long they were both fast asleep, snoring lightly.
The following day Mr. Cheng did not show up at Wang Qiyao's after work—he went to see Jiang Lili instead.
He had called her at her office, and they agreed to meet on Tilan Bridge.
By the time Mr. Cheng arrived, Jiang Lili was already standing there waiting, constantly looking at her watch.
She had clearly arrived too early but insisted on blaming Mr. Cheng for being late.
Mr. Cheng refused to argue with her. They found a small restaurant nearby, went in, and ordered a few dishes.
As soon as the waiter turned away, Mr. Cheng bent over the table and started to cry, a stream of tears falling steadily on the bleached table cloth.
Jiang Lili could pretty much figure out what had happened, but made no effort to comfort him. All she offered was silence as she silently fixed her gaze on the ashen wall, which had recently been stained a pale white.
At that moment, all Mr. Cheng was focused on was his own pain, and he made no effort to understand what Jiang Lili might be feeling. Even people as good-natured and generous as Mr. Cheng can become extremely selfish and unfair in love.
They tiptoe around their loved ones, fearful of giving offense; but with the people who love them they are thoroughly inconsiderate and arrogant, behaving like spoiled brats.
This was what had motivated him to seek out Jiang Lili.
Jiang Lili did not speak for a long time. Then, seeing that he was still crying, she sneered, "What's wrong? Went out and got your heart broken, did you?"
Mr. Cheng gradually stopped crying and sat in silence.
Jiang Lili had the urge to taunt him further, but, taking pity on him, softened up. "You know, it seems like the harder we try to get something, the more elusive it becomes. But when we don't want something, it ends up falling into our lap."
Mr. Cheng asked softly, "And what if one gives up on something but it still remains elusive?"
Jiang Lili was livid. She raised her voice, "What, are all the women in the world dead?
Don't tell me that I'm the only one left?
Sent here to listen to you ramble on about your grievances over her?"
Mr. Cheng lowered his head contritely and was silent. Jiang Lili also gave up speaking to him, and the two of them sat for some time in an awkward silence. In the end, it was Mr. Cheng who continued. "Actually, I came here to ask a favor of you. . . . I'm not sure what made me break down like that. I'm so sorry."
Somewhat mollified, Jiang Lili told him to go ahead and say what he had to say.
"I've been thinking about this for a long time, and you are the only one I can go to for help. I know it's not right, but there is no one else I can turn to."
"Whatever it is, let's hear it!"
Mr. Cheng explained that he would never again visit Wang Qiyao. He wanted to ask Jiang Lili to look out for her.
Jiang Lili did not know whether to be angry or bitter. It took a long time before she managed to say, "Well I guess all the women in the world are dead . . . even me."
Mr. Cheng took her ridicule in stride and Jiang Lili stopped herself from saying more.
Wang Qiyao waited for Mr. Cheng's return. She waited several days, but in the end it was Jiang Lili who came to visit.
She had come straight from work in Yangshupu and had had to transfer several times on the bus. By the time she got there, her hair was disheveled, her shoes were covered with dust, and she was quite hoarse.
She carried a netted bag stuffed with fruits, crackers, milk powder, and a barely used bed sheet.
She emptied everything out onto the table before Wang Qiyao could stop her, and with several forceful motions, ripped the bed sheet into several small pieces to be used as diapers.
Old Colour
"LAO KE-LA" REFERS to a specific breed of debonair figures active during the fifties and sixties.
These were the keepers of old-style Shanghai fashion in the new society, at a time when holding on to the past was considered radical.
The term probably originated with the English word "old colour," or perhaps "old classic," a remnant of the colonial culture of Shanghai in the day of the treaty ports.
As the lingo of the city incorporated bits and pieces of foreign languages, words became dismembered and, with the passage of time, grew increasingly distant from their original meanings.
By the eighties, people who fell into the category of "Old Colour" were virtually extinct. The surviving handful were all fairly advanced in age, their erstwhile shape completely transformed; eventually even the term itself was forgotten.
But then something odd happened. In the mid eighties, a new generation of Old Colours emerged quietly upon the scene. Lacking their predecessors' craving for notoriety, they were not compelled to behave ostentatiously and appeared more easygoing.
It was not even easy to spot them in the crowd. Where might one go to find such a specimen?
These Old Colours—when everyone was out buying a stereo, they were listening to old phonographs. When Nikon and Minolta cameras equipped with auto-focus features were all the rage, they were busy fiddling with their vintage Rolleiflex 120s. They sported wind-up watches, drank coffee brewed in small pots, shaved with old-fashioned razor blades and shaving cream, took great delight in antique slide projectors, and wore large leather shoes shaped like boats. When you saw these markings, you could be certain that you had found one.
Then, having found one, you couldn't help but notice just how crude and boorish the so-called fashionable were in comparison.
The rush to be trendy left no time for elegance or refinement.
One was driven about by a succession of waves.
Speed and quantity were all that mattered, and the result was that corners were cut and things got done in a slipshod manner and had eventually to be discarded.
You could tell this by looking at the clothing shops where advertisements for markdowns were posted all over the walls, shelves, and counters—even the stalls outside. Before the last season's clothes had sold out, they were two steps behind the latest fashion, which had already arrived. What choice was there but to run constant sales and markdowns?
In this crude and uncultured fashion world, the "Old Colours" were the stewards in charge of safekeeping refinement.
They were the only ones paying attention to the things that mattered; though they never advertised themselves or talked about what they were doing, they had their feet firmly planted on the ground. They took things one step at a time; men of action, they let others do the talking.
They didn't even have a name. The term "Old Colour" was given to them by the few who remembered the old days, but it never gained wide circulation.
A small minority called them Western-style "Yuppies," but that never caught on either.
And so they remained nameless, silently tilling their little plot of land.
We could, if we chose, refer to them as nostalgic "lovers of the past," although they were all young and didn't have a past to love per se. But they had all been to the Bund and seen, riding on the ferry, what it looked like from out on the water: there they saw the ramparts formed by the Georgian buildings, the Gothic bell tower with its pointed steeple, and the dark forbidding windows staring back at them—all of which sent them down the tunnel of time.
They had also climbed up to the rooftops to release pigeons and fly kites, and there, looking out over the sea of rooftops, a few of which jutted out like sails, felt as if they were navigating against the currents of time.
Besides these, the ivy crawling up the sides of the walls and the sounds of someone playing the piano in the Western-style house next door also came to feed their nostalgia.
Wang Qiyao knew one of these "Old Colours." He was twenty-six years old, so calling him an "Old Colour" was a bit ironic, a way of emphasizing his youth.
A gym teacher at a local middle school, he normally dressed in sweatpants, and his hair looked like the bristle end of a scrub brush.
He had a dark complexion from years of working outdoors.
At school he kept to himself and never fraternized with his colleagues. Who would have guessed that he was an accomplished flamenco guitar player with a collection of more than a hundred jazz records?
This "Old Colour" lived in a traditional longtang in Hongkou, with parents who were honest, hardworking government employees and watched what they spent; his sister had left home to get married.
He himself occupied the third-floor tingzijian: his palmwood cot lay on the floor along with his record player. As soon as he entered his room, he would take off his shoes and, sitting on the bare floor, enter into his own little universe.
Outside his dormer window was a slanted portion of the roof. Occasionally, during the summer, he would climb out the window with a backpack, spread a mat out over the roof tiles, and, tying himself to the windowsill with a rope around his waist, spend the evening lying outside.
Looking up, he would see a sprinkling of stars suspended in the deep blue sky above.
He could faintly make out the rumbling sounds of the machinery from a factory in the distance, and the smoke from the factory's smokestack billowed white against the sky.
The scattered sounds of the night seemed to have sunk down to earth, while he himself had dissolved into the air, empty of thoughts and desires.
Old Colour was still without a girlfriend.
Although he got on quite well with some of the girls in his regular circle of friends, things had never developed past the point of ordinary friendship. As there was nothing further he needed, he had no particular aspirations and was content just to have a job. However, he recognized that he had only himself to rely on, and this made him approach things with a positive attitude.
And, though he lacked long-term goals, he did have some short-term plans.
This meant that, while never vexed by major problems, he was struck by the occasional fit of inexplicable depression.
For these depressions he found an antidote in his collection of old jazz records from the twenties.
The sound of the saxophone, mixed with the hissing sound of the needle against the vinyl, gave him a feeling of an almost palpable intimacy.
Old Colour was a bit old-fashioned: nothing new suited his taste, because to him it lacked substance and smacked of the nouveau riche; but then neither was he a fan of things that were too old, which would have felt antiquated and dismal. A hundred years was just about enough.
He longed for a time back when, like the sprinkling of stars in the night sky, only the elite prospered—for a European-style house on a smooth cobblestone road, and the spiraling sounds of the phonograph twisting their way up through an otherwise perfect silence.
This was, when all was said and done, what all those old jazz records stood for.
His young friends were all modern individuals at the cutting edge of fashion, quite the opposite of Old Colour.
When Shanghai inaugurated its first tennis court, his friends were the first customers standing in line; when a certain luxury hotel opened up a bowling alley, they were the first to try it out.
All of them were college classmates of Old Colour from the phys-ed department; they prided themselves on their athletic spirit and prowess, which happened to be right in tune with worldwide fashion.
Just look at the most popular brand names of the day—Nike and Puma—you could see that they were all athletic apparel, whereas brands like Pierre Cardin had long been on the way down.
This cohort would appear on the streets on motorcycles, a girl seated at the back with her hair streaming down from her helmet, and you could feel the rush of wind as they flew past.
They were the wildest ones on the dance floor at the discos.
They always managed to get hold of a foreigner or two to give their gatherings an international flavor—which, incidentally, gained them entry into all kinds of exclusive places where only international guests were welcome.
Among them, Old Colour was always the quiet one: he never really contributed to the group.
When everyone else was having a great time, he would be off standing in one corner as if he did not count.
He seemed a bit lonely, but it was precisely such loneliness that provided this fashionable, happy-go-lucky crowd with a certain substance.
So it actually wouldn't have been the same if he hadn't been there.
As for himself, he needed a modern backdrop to set himself off from everyone else; had he been thrown into the sea of people unattached, his old-fashioned style would have been completely drowned out.
Because his style appeared outdated on the surface, people had a hard time identifying it for what it was; but it really stood out against a super-modern background, like an antique placed on a velvet mat. Without the mat, someone would probably have thrown the piece away, thinking it was junk.
Therefore Old Colour had to run with that crowd, lonely as he may have been. If he had left, he would have lost even the distinction of being lonely—he would have simply disappeared among the teeming masses.
Old Colour's parents always thought of him as a responsible son; he didn't drink or smoke, had a steady job and a healthy hobby, and never got mixed up with the wrong sort of girl.
They themselves had been fairly conservative in their youth; going to the movies once a week was their sole entertainment.
There was a period when his mother became obsessed with collecting movie pamphlets, but during the Cultural Revolution she took it upon herself to burn her entire collection; later the movie theaters stopped putting them out.
Once his parents bought a television set, they stopped going to the movies altogether.
Every night they would turn on the television after dinner and watch until eleven o'clock.
With this television set, their golden years seemed perfect.
The music their son played up in the tingzijian had a familiar sound, which tended to confirm their opinions that he was steady.
The fact that he was taciturn also put them at ease.
Even when they had dinner together at the same table, the entire meal would pass with barely a few words.
When it came down to it, they were all strangers to each other, but seeing each other, day in, day out, they didn't think much about their state, as if this was how it was supposed to be.
But they were, in truth, decent people; their thoughts and actions were always in line and, whether it be spiritual or material, just a little bit of space was enough for them.
Crammed in under the rooftops of the Shanghai longtang were countless people living out their frugal lives just like that.
On occasion you might feel that it is rather noisy—as soon as the windows were opened, your ears would be assaulted by all kinds of sounds. But don't be offended: what you hear are the accumulated sounds of the activities of prudent people over their lifetime; at least the noise shows that they are lively.
And Old Colour certainly wasn't the only one stargazing from the rooftop on those summer nights; the hearts of all these people are restless and unsure of where to go—and so up they go to the rooftops.
There everything is wide open; even the knowing pigeons are bedded down for the evening, leaving the sky empty of their flight.
All the noise and clatter remain below, but they have floated to the top and it feels good to drift for a while.
In these longtang with the dormer windows, the songs of the heart have quite a distinctive sound, and the dormer windows are the throats through which the songs are forced out.
Old Colour finds true understanding in the neighborhoods on the west side of Shanghai, and he likes to wander there along the tree-lined streets.
Even the canopies of the trees there have a history, having filtered out the sunlight for a century. Maoming Road passes from a roaring hubbub on one end to quietude on the other, both of which have the vintage of years.
Old Colour loved traversing this area, where he had the feeling that time had been turned back.
Examining the trolley tracks on the street, he tried to imagine what it was like when the cars were still running; he could picture two rows of wooden benches facing each other inside the trolley, just like the ones he had seen in old silent films. There seemed to be writing on the brick and stonework of the old hotels; as he patiently read them, the words recounted trials and tribulations from the past.
The areas on the east side of the city also understood Old Colour. Every major street there leads to the river. Though the scene is less refined, it has a sharpness about it. The silent film being played here is more like a sweeping epic, the action coming on like a hurricane.
Time has stopped for the seagulls soaring across the sky, as it has for the pigeons. That's what he, too, wanted—for time to stop.
That's not too much to ask, is it? He didn't ask for an eternity, only the last fifty years.
His request was restrained, like the sunrise in the city, which does not come up over the sea or the horizon, but from the rooftops—its beginning and the end curtailed.
In fact, the city is still a child and doesn't have many days to look back upon.
But a child like Old Colour was already an old man, who, bypassing experience, went straight to reminiscence. All of his deepest thoughts were dialogues with the past.
At least the clock in the Customs House was still ringing, in a world where everything else seemed to have vanished like clouds and mist, and the sound he heard was the very sound heard decades ago.
As Old Colour walked down the street, the wind blowing against his face was a draft squeezed through the space between two buildings. He may have looked calm on the surface, but his heart was vibrant, almost dancing with joy.
He loved the sunset over Shanghai; the streets at dusk were like a faded oil painting, a perfect match for the mood of the city.
One day a friend of his told Old Colour about a party someone was having. All kinds of people were supposed to be coming, including a former Miss Shanghai from the old days.
He hopped onto the back of his friend's motorcycle, and they headed west to the new residential area near the airport.
The man lived on the thirteenth floor of a building that he was managing for the owner, a relative of his who was living overseas.
He didn't normally live there, but every few days he would invite friends over for a fun-filled afternoon or evening.
Gradually, his parties started to gain some notoriety: word traveled fast, as one guest brought ten friends and each of them brought along others—but he didn't mind, everyone was welcome.
As the numbers started to build up, it was inevitable that some questionable individuals would weasel their way in, and sometimes unpleasant things, such as thefts, would happen.
But with so many people, the probability of someone extraordinary showing up was also quite high.
Occasionally, real celebrities would appear, such as movie stars, the first violin from a famous orchestra, and reporters, as well as the children and grandchildren of powerful Communist and Nationalist leaders.
This friend's parties were like small political meetings, where old stories and the latest gossip were passed around the living room, the whole place abuzz with excitement.
In this new district, all you saw when you opened the windows was a forest of buildings. Some of the windows were lit up while others remained dark; the sky was unobstructed, but this made the stars seem more distant.
Below, the cars speeding down the straight broad roads looked like a chain of pearls.
Not far off there would always be a construction site, where the lights blazed through the night and the noise of pile-drivers, hammering away in rhythm, filled the entire space below the heavens.
The air is choked with particles of chalky cement and the wind is especially strong as it whips between the buildings.
The lights over in the hotel district look a little lonely due to the heights of the buildings around it, but theirs is a resplendent loneliness that pierces the heart with rapture.
This was indeed a brand-new district that greeted everything with an open heart, quite unlike the downtown area, whose convoluted feelings are more difficult to grasp.
Arriving in the new district, one has the feeling that one has left the city behind. The style of the streets and buildings—built at right angles in a logical manner—is so unlike downtown, which seems to have been laid out by squeezing the emotions out from the heart.
Under the sky of the new district, the joyful laughter coming from the thirteenth floor of this joint-venture construction suddenly dissipates and the music fades away.
But how much does that bit of happiness really matter in this new district?
Playing out behind the honeycomb-like windows of those tall buildings is a fresh new form of happiness.
In hotels so new that they have yet to acquire their four or five stars, there are buffets, dances, and receptions every night, as well as brazen games of passion that offered no excuses as they announced themselves to the world with "do not disturb" signs.
With people of all races and colors taking part, it feels like a party of universal jubilation.
This is especially so around Christmas time: as soon as the Christmas carols break out, you are hard pressed to discern whether you are in China or abroad.
When you first arrive here, the place seems to lack a heart because it is so carefree—but that is because it hasn't yet had time to build up a reservoir of recollections; its mind is blank and has not begun to feel the need to call on its memory.
Such is the spiritual state of the entire district.
The laughter and gaiety coming from the thirteenth floor form but a drop in the ocean.
The only one who seems a bit annoyed is the elevator attendant, as people come rushing in and out of the elevator, in couples or crowds, holding wine and flowers—mostly strangers, in all shapes, sizes, and colors.
More than a dozen groups of guests had already arrived by the time Old Colour got to the party.
The door had been left half-open and the room was filled with people moving about.
No one paid the newcomers much attention as they came in; the stereo was blaring loud music.
A few people sat around watching a television miniseries in the first room, which led out to the balcony.
The door to the balcony was ajar and the wind was agitating the curtains.
In a corner of this room sat a woman with fair skin, wearing light makeup, in a pinkish-purple suit made of raw silk.
She was leaning forward slightly toward the television screen with her arms crossed.
The curtain brushed against her skirt from time to time, but this didn't seem to distract her.
Only when the screen suddenly lit up did her drooping eyelids show, giving away her age.
But the stamp of age passes in a flickering instant: she carefully wrapped hers up and tucked it away inside her bones.
The years had tiptoed around her, careful not to leave too many traces, but in the end they couldn't help leaving a few.
This was Wang Qiyao in 1985.
Around this time the opulence of 1946 was revived in a few essays reminiscing about old Shanghai, and the name Wang Qiyao suddenly came into the spotlight again.
One or two nosy reporters even went so far as to investigate what had happened to Wang Qiyao in the years following the pageant; several articles were published in the back pages of the newspapers but failed to generate much interest, and the whole thing eventually died down.
A lot of time had indeed gone by. No matter how glamorous a woman has been, once she has entered the black hole of time, she is lucky to generate even a few flickers of light.
The aura surrounding the beauty pageant, no less than Wang Qiyao herself, had also faded after forty years, and it only served to date her by revealing her age.
It was like the old clothes at the bottom of her chest: though many were still in good shape, wearing them only made her look older, because they were from the wrong era.
The only one who seemed to be moved by any of this history was Zhang Yonghong. She didn't believe the story initially, but once she had accepted it she had an endless array of questions for Wang Qiyao.
Wang Qiyao, for her part, resisted answering them at first, but once she began to open up, she had an endless series of revelations for Zhang Yonghong to uncover.
There were many things that Wang Qiyao thought she had completely forgotten, but as soon as she got started, all of those tiny bits and fragments of detail came together to make a flowing river of memories.
The stories she told were those of a woman who had stood in the limelight; but wasn't that the goal of all those girls on Huaihai Road trying to outdress one another?
Wave after wave of fashion that came and went—weren't they all vying for their moment in the spotlight?
Zhang Yonghong, who understood the magnitude of the splendor Wang Qiyao was describing, exclaimed, "I'm so envious!"
Zhang Yonghong introduced Wang Qiyao to all of her boyfriends and invited her to all kinds of parties.
These were mostly parties for young people, and, knowing her own place, Wang Qiyao would usually sit off to one side. Nevertheless, her elegance would still add a touch of distinction to the party.
Barring the occasional glance, people didn't pay her any attention, but everyone was aware that there was a "Miss Shanghai" in their presence.
On occasion there might even be a few people eagerly awaiting her arrival, not realizing that she had been sitting in the corner all along—she sat there alone until the music stopped and the show was over.
Wang Qiyao was always well dressed and elegant; she was never awkward and never got in the way.
She was an ornament, a painting on the wall to adorn the living room.
The painting was done in somber hues, with a dark yellow base; it had true distinction, and even though the colors were faded, its value had appreciated.
Everything else was simply transient flashes of light and shadow.
It was under these circumstances that Old Colour first met Wang Qiyao. Could that be the "Miss Shanghai" everyone was talking about? he wondered.
Just as he was about to walk away, he saw Wang Qiyao look up and scan the room before lowering her head again.
The look in her eyes had a hint of panic, but she was not at all looking for sympathy or forgiveness.
It was then that Old Colour realized how callous he had been. He thought, The Miss Shanghai pageant was nearly forty years ago.
His vision grew blurry as he stared at Wang Qiyao, as if his eyes couldn't focus properly, and through that hazy vision he saw an image of her from more than three decades ago.
Gradually the image became clearer, taking on depth and new details.
But none of those details looked real; they floated on the surface, piercing Old Colour's heart.
He came face to face with a cruel reality—the corrosive power of time.
At twenty-six years of age, Old Colour should have been too young to care about the passing of time; time had yet to teach him such truths, but that is precisely why he longed for the past—that is the only reason he dared to extol the fruits of time!
The passage of time associated with those old jazz records was indeed a good thing; it had smoothed things out until they were strong and fine, rubbing off the superficial layers to reveal the inner grain, like gold emerging when the fire has burned away the dross.
But what he saw that day was not an object, like an old jazz record, but a person. He was at a complete loss as to what to say, because the situation had an element of the tragic. He had finally touched the heart of that bygone era, whereas before he had only paced back and forth on its surface.
Something halted his steps and Old Colour couldn't bring himself to walk away.
He picked up a glass of wine and leaned up against the door, fixing his gaze on the television.
Eventually Wang Qiyao got up from the corner to go to the restroom.
As she walked past him, he flashed her a smile.
She immediately accepted his smile, responding with a look of gratitude before smiling back at him.
When she came back, he asked her if he could get her a drink.
She pointed to the corner and said that she already had a cup of tea, so there was no need.
He asked her to dance. She hesitated for a moment . . . and accepted.
Disco music was blaring in the living room, but they danced the four-step at half speed.
With all manner of wild movements swirling around them, only they were stationary, like a lone island in a rushing torrent.
She apologized, suggesting that he go back to disco dancing rather than waste his time with her.
But he insisted that he was having a good time.
He put his hand on her waist and could feel the slight pulsations of her body. It was a strategy of nonmovement in response to the myriad changes taking place around her, of finding her own rhythm, no matter what the tempo of her surroundings might be, a rhythm that could carry her through time.
Moved by this, he remained lost in silence until she suddenly complimented his dance skills; they were now doing a traditional Latin number.
When the tune changed, someone else invited Wang Qiyao to dance.
During the next number, they each danced with their respective partners but their eyes occasionally met, whereupon they exchanged a knowing smile, lit up with the joy of this chance meeting.
The party took place on the evening of National Day and fireworks were being set off from one of the balconies. A single rocket shot up into the darkness and slowly unfurled its fiery petals in the night sky before breaking up into a stream of falling stars, which vanished slowly, leaving a faint white shadow in the sky.
It was some time before the last of the light was absorbed into the blackness.
The Madness Years
China, 1967
The Red Union had been attacking the headquarters of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade for two days. Their red flags fluttered restlessly around the brigade building like flames yearning for firewood.
The Red Union commander was anxious, though not because of the defenders he faced. The more than two hundred Red Guards of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade were mere greenhorns compared with the veteran Red Guards of the Red Union, which was formed at the start of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in early 1966. The Red Union had been tempered by the tumultuous experience of revolutionary tours around the country and seeing Chairman Mao in the great rallies in Tiananmen Square.
But the commander was afraid of the dozen or so iron stoves inside the building, filled with explosives and connected to each other by electric detonators. He couldn't see them, but he could feel their presence like iron sensing the pull of a nearby magnet. If a defender flipped the switch, revolutionaries and counter-revolutionaries alike would all die in one giant ball of fire. And the young Red Guards of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade were indeed capable of such madness.
Compared with the weathered men and women of the first generation of Red Guards, the new rebels were a pack of wolves on hot coals, crazier than crazy.
The slender figure of a beautiful young girl emerged at the top of the building, waving the giant red banner of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade. Her appearance was greeted immediately by a cacophony of gunshots. The weapons attacking her were a diverse mix: antiques such as American carbines, Czech-style machine guns, Japanese Type-38 rifles; newer weapons such as standard-issue People's Liberation Army rifles and submachine guns, stolen from the PLA after the publication of the "August Editorial"; and even a few Chinese dadao swords and spears. Together, they formed a condensed version of modern history.
Numerous members of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade had engaged in similar displays before. They'd stand on top of the building, wave a flag, shout slogans through megaphones, and scatter flyers at the attackers below. Every time, the courageous man or woman had been able to retreat safely from the hailstorm of bullets and earn glory for their valor.
The new girl clearly thought she'd be just as lucky.
She waved the battle banner as though brandishing her burning youth, trusting that the enemy would be burnt to ashes in the revolutionary flames, imagining that an ideal world would be born tomorrow from the ardor and zeal coursing through her blood....
She was intoxicated by her brilliant, crimson dream until a bullet pierced her chest. Her fifteen-year-old body was so soft that the bullet hardly slowed down as it passed through it and whistled in the air behind her.
The young Red Guard tumbled down along with her flag, her light form descending even more slowly than the piece of red fabric, like a little bird unwilling to leave the sky.
The Red Union warriors shouted in joy. A few rushed to the foot of the building, tore away the battle banner of the April Twenty-eighth Brigade, and seized the slender, lifeless body. They raised their trophy overhead and flaunted it for a while before tossing it toward the top of the metal gate of the compound.
Most of the gate's metal bars, capped with sharp tips, had been pulled down at the beginning of the factional civil wars to be used as spears, but two still remained. As their sharp tips caught the girl, life seemed to return momentarily to her body.
The Red Guards backed up some distance and began to use the impaled body for target practice. For her, the dense storm of bullets was now no different from a gentle rain, as she could no longer feel anything.
From time to time, her vinelike arms jerked across her body softly, as though she were flicking off drops of rain. And then half of her young head was blown away, and only a single, beautiful eye remained to stare at the blue sky of 1967. There was no pain in that gaze, only solidified devotion and yearning.
And yet, compared to some others, she was fortunate. At least she died in the throes of passionately sacrificing herself for an ideal.
Battles like this one raged across Beijing like a multitude of CPUs working in parallel, their combined output, the Cultural Revolution.
A flood of madness drowned the city and seeped into every nook and cranny.
At the edge of the city, on the exercise grounds of Tsinghua University, a mass "struggle session" attended by thousands had been going on for nearly two hours.
As the revolutionaries had splintered into numerous factions, opposing forces everywhere engaged in complex maneuvers and contests.
Within the university, intense conflicts erupted between the Red Guards, the Cultural Revolution Working Group, the Workers' Propaganda Team, and the Military Propaganda Team. And each faction divided into new rebel groups from time to time, each based on different backgrounds and agendas, leading to even more ruthless fighting.
But for this mass struggle session, the victims were the reactionary bourgeois academic authorities. These were the enemies of every faction, and they had no choice but to endure cruel attacks from every side.
Compared to other "Monsters and Demons," reactionary academic authorities were special: During the earliest struggle sessions, they had been both arrogant and stubborn. That was also the stage in which they had died in the largest numbers.
Over a period of forty days, in Beijing alone, more than seventeen hundred victims of struggle sessions were beaten to death. Many others picked an easier path to avoid the madness: Lao She, Wu Han, Jian Bozan, Fu Lei, Zhao Jiuzhang, Yi Qun, Wen Jie, Hai Mo, and other once-respected intellectuals had all chosen to end their lives.
Those who survived that initial period gradually became numb as the ruthless struggle sessions continued. The protective mental shell helped them avoid total breakdown.
They often seemed to be half asleep during the sessions and would only startle awake when someone screamed in their faces to make them mechanically recite their confessions, already repeated countless times.
Then, some of them entered a third stage. The constant, unceasing struggle sessions injected vivid political images into their consciousness like mercury, until their minds, erected upon knowledge and rationality, collapsed under the assault. They began to really believe that they were guilty, to see how they had harmed the great cause of the revolution. They cried, and their repentance was far deeper and more sincere than that of those Monsters and Demons who were not intellectuals.
For the Red Guards, heaping abuse upon victims in those two latter mental stages was utterly boring. Only those Monsters and Demons who were still in the initial stage could give their overstimulated brains the thrill they craved, like the red cape of the matador. But such desirable victims had grown scarce. In Tsinghua there was probably only one left. Because he was so rare, he was reserved for the very end of the struggle session.
Ye Zhetai had survived the Cultural Revolution so far, but he remained in the first mental stage. He refused to repent, to kill himself, or to become numb.
When this physics professor walked onto the stage in front of the crowd, his expression clearly said: Let the cross I bear be even heavier.
The Red Guards did indeed have him carry a burden, but it wasn't a cross.
Other victims wore tall hats made from bamboo frames, but his was welded from thick steel bars. And the plaque he wore around his neck wasn't wooden, like the others, but an iron door taken from a laboratory oven. His name was written on the door in striking black characters, and two red diagonals were drawn across them in a large X.
Twice the number of Red Guards used for other victims escorted Ye onto the stage: two men and four women.
The two young men strode with confidence and purpose, the very image of mature Bolshevik youths. They were both fourth-year students majoring in theoretical physics, and Ye was their professor. The women, really girls, were much younger, second-year students from the junior high school attached to the university. Dressed in military uniforms and equipped with bandoliers, they exuded youthful vigor and surrounded Ye Zhetai like four green flames.
His appearance excited the crowd. The shouting of slogans, which had slackened a bit, now picked up with renewed force and drowned out everything else like a resurgent tide.
After waiting patiently for the noise to subside, one of the male Red Guards turned to the victim. "Ye Zhetai, you are an expert in mechanics. You should see how strong the great unified force you're resisting is. To remain so stubborn will lead only to your death!
Today, we will continue the agenda from the last time. There's no need to waste words.
Answer the following question without your typical deceit: Between the years of 1962 and 1965, did you not decide on your own to add relativity to the intro physics course?"
"Relativity is part of the fundamental theories of physics," Ye answered. "How can a basic survey course not teach it?"
"You lie!" a female Red Guard by his side shouted. "Einstein is a reactionary academic authority. He would serve any master who dangled money in front of him. He even went to the American Imperialists and helped them build the atom bomb!
To develop a revolutionary science, we must overthrow the black banner of capitalism represented by the theory of relativity!"
Ye remained silent. Enduring the pain brought by the heavy iron hat and the iron plaque hanging from his neck, he had no energy to answer questions that were not worth answering.
Behind him, one of his students also frowned.
The girl who had spoken was the most intelligent of the four female Red Guards, and she was clearly prepared, as she had been seen memorizing the struggle session script before coming onstage. But against someone like Ye Zhetai, a few slogans like that were insufficient.
The Red Guards decided to bring out the new weapon they had prepared against their teacher. One of them waved to someone offstage.
Ye's wife, physics professor Shao Lin, stood up from the crowd's front row. She walked onto the stage dressed in an ill-fitting green outfit, clearly intended to imitate the military uniform of the Red Guards. Those who knew her remembered that she had often taught class in an elegant qipao, and her current appearance felt forced and awkward.
"Ye Zhetai!"
She was clearly unused to such theater, and though she tried to make her voice louder, the effort magnified the tremors in it. "You didn't think I would stand up and expose you, criticize you?
Yes, in the past, I was fooled by you. You covered my eyes with your reactionary view of the world and science!
But now I am awake and alert. With the help of the revolutionary youths, I want to stand on the side of the revolution, the side of the people!"
She turned to face the crowd. "Comrades, revolutionary youths, revolutionary faculty and staff, we must clearly understand the reactionary nature of Einstein's theory of relativity. This is most apparent in general relativity: Its static model of the universe negates the dynamic nature of matter. It is anti-dialectical!
It treats the universe as limited, which is absolutely a form of reactionary idealism...."
As he listened to his wife's lecture, Ye allowed himself a wry smile.
Lin, I fooled you?
Indeed, in my heart you've always been a mystery.
One time, I praised your genius to your father—he's lucky to have died early and escaped this catastrophe—and he shook his head, telling me that he did not think you would ever achieve much academically. What he said next turned out to be so important to the second half of my life: "Lin Lin is too smart. To work in fundamental theory, one must be stupid."
In later years, I began to understand his words more and more.
Lin, you truly are too smart. Even a few years ago, you could feel the political winds shifting in academia and prepared yourself. For example, when you taught, you changed the names of many physical laws and constants: Ohm's law you called resistance law, Maxwell's equations you called electromagnetic equations, Planck's constant you called the quantum constant....
You explained to your students that all scientific accomplishments resulted from the wisdom of the working masses, and those capitalist academic authorities only stole these fruits and put their names on them.
But even so, you couldn't be accepted by the revolutionary mainstream. Look at you now: You're not allowed to wear the red armband of the "revolutionary faculty and staff"; you had to come up here empty-handed, without the status to carry a Little Red Book....
You can't overcome the fault of being born to a prominent family in pre-revolutionary China and of having such famous scholars as parents.
But you actually have more to confess about Einstein than I do.
In the winter of 1922, Einstein visited Shanghai. Because your father spoke fluent German, he was asked to accompany Einstein on his tour.
You told me many times that your father went into physics because of Einstein's encouragement, and you chose physics because of your father's influence. So, in a way, Einstein can be said to have indirectly been your teacher. And you once felt so proud and lucky to have such a connection.
Later, I found out that your father had told you a white lie. He and Einstein had only one very brief conversation.
The morning of November 13, 1922, he accompanied Einstein on a walk along Nanjing Road. Others who went on the walk included Yu Youren, president of Shanghai University, and Cao Gubing, general manager of the newspaper Ta Kung Pao. When they passed a maintenance site in the road bed, Einstein stopped next to a worker who was smashing stones and silently observed this boy with torn clothes and dirty face and hands. He asked your father how much the boy earned each day.
After asking the boy, he told Einstein: five cents.
This was the only time he spoke with the great scientist who changed the world. There was no discussion of physics, of relativity, only cold, harsh reality.
According to your father, Einstein stood there for a long time after hearing the answer, watching the boy's mechanical movements, not even bothering to smoke his pipe as the embers went out.
After your father recounted this memory to me, he sighed and said, "In China, any idea that dared to take flight would only crash back to the ground. The gravity of reality is too strong."
"Lower your head!" one of the male Red Guards shouted.
This may actually have been a gesture of mercy from his former student. All victims being struggled against were supposed to lower their heads. If Ye did lower his head, the tall, heavy iron hat would fall off, and if he kept his head lowered, there would be no reason to put it back on him.
But Ye refused and held his head high, supporting the heavy weight with his thin neck.
"Lower your head, you stubborn reactionary!"
One of the girl Red Guards took off her belt and swung it at Ye. The copper belt buckle struck his forehead and left a clear impression that was quickly blurred by oozing blood.
He swayed unsteadily for a few moments, then stood straight and firm again.
One of the male Red Guards said, "When you taught quantum mechanics, you also mixed in many reactionary ideas."
Then he nodded at Shao Lin, indicating that she should continue.
Shao was happy to oblige. She had to keep on talking, otherwise her fragile mind, already hanging on only by a thin thread, would collapse completely.
"Ye Zhetai, you cannot deny this charge!
You have often lectured students on the reactionary Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics."
"It is, after all, the explanation recognized to be most in line with experimental results."
His tone, so calm and collected, surprised and frightened Shao Lin.
"This explanation posits that external observation leads to the collapse of the quantum wave function. This is another expression of reactionary idealism, and it's indeed the most brazen expression."
"Should philosophy guide experiments, or should experiments guide philosophy?"
Ye's sudden counterattack shocked those leading the struggle session. For a moment they did not know what to do.
"Of course it should be the correct philosophy of Marxism that guides scientific experiments!" one of the male Red Guards finally said.
"Then that's equivalent to saying that the correct philosophy falls out of the sky.
This is against the idea that the truth emerges from experience. It's counter to the principles of how Marxism seeks to understand nature."
Shao Lin and the two college student Red Guards had no answer for this. Unlike the Red Guards who were still in junior high school, they couldn't completely ignore logic.
But the four junior high girls had their own revolutionary methods that they believed were invincible. The girl who had hit Ye before took out her belt and whipped Ye again. The other three girls also took off their belts to strike at Ye. With their companion displaying such revolutionary fervor, they had to display even more, or at least the same amount.
The two male Red Guards didn't interfere. If they tried to intervene now, they would be suspected of being insufficiently revolutionary.
"You also taught the big bang theory. This is the most reactionary of all scientific theories."
One of the male Red Guards spoke up, trying to change the subject.
"Maybe in the future this theory will be disproven. But two great cosmological discoveries of this century— Hubble's law, and observation of the cosmic microwave background–show that the big bang theory is currently the most plausible explanation for the origin of the universe."
"Lies!"
Shao Lin shouted. Then she began a long lecture about the big bang theory, remembering to splice in insightful critiques of the theory's extremely reactionary nature.
But the freshness of the theory attracted the most intelligent of the four girls, who couldn't help but ask, "Time began with the singularity?
So what was there before the singularity?"
"Nothing," Ye said, the way he would answer a question from any curious young person. He turned to look at the girl kindly. With his injuries and the tall iron hat, the motion was very difficult.
"No ... nothing?
That's reactionary!
Completely reactionary!" the frightened girl shouted. She turned to Shao Lin, who gladly came to her aid.
"The theory leaves open a place to be filled by God."
Shao nodded at the girl.
The young Red Guard, confused by these new thoughts, finally found her footing. She raised her hand, still holding the belt, and pointed at Ye. "You: you're trying to say that God exists?"
"I don't know."
"What?"
"I'm saying I don't know. If by 'God' you mean some kind of superconsciousness outside the universe, I don't know if it exists or not. Science has given no evidence either way."
Actually, in this nightmarish moment, Ye was leaning toward believing that God did not exist.
This extremely reactionary statement caused a commotion in the crowd. Led by one of the Red Guards on stage, another tide of slogan-shouting exploded.
"Down with reactionary academic authority Ye Zhetai!"
"Down with all reactionary academic authorities!"
"Down with all reactionary doctrines!"
Once the slogans died down, the girl shouted, "God does not exist. All religions are tools concocted by the ruling class to paralyze the spirit of the people!"
"That is a very one-sided view," Ye said calmly.
The young Red Guard, embarrassed and angry, reached the conclusion that, against this dangerous enemy, all talk was useless.
She picked up her belt and rushed at Ye, and her three companions followed.
Ye was tall, and the four fourteen-year-olds had to swing their belts upward to reach his head, still held high.
After a few strikes, the tall iron hat, which had protected him a little, fell off. The continuing barrage of strikes by the metal buckles finally made him fall down.
The young Red Guards, encouraged by their success, became even more devoted to this glorious struggle. They were fighting for faith, for ideals. They were intoxicated by the bright light cast on them by history, proud of their own bravery....
Ye's two students had finally had enough. "The chairman instructed us to 'rely on eloquence rather than violence'!" They rushed over and pulled the four semicrazed girls off Ye.
But it was already too late. The physicist lay quietly on the ground, his eyes still open as blood oozed from his head. The frenzied crowd sank into silence.
The only thing that moved was a thin stream of blood. Like a red snake, it slowly meandered across the stage, reached the edge, and dripped onto a chest below. The rhythmic sound made by the blood drops was like the steps of someone walking away.
A cackling laugh broke the silence. The sound came from Shao Lin, whose mind had finally broken. The laughter frightened the attendees, who began to leave the struggle session, first in trickles, and then in a flood.
The exercise grounds soon emptied, leaving only one young woman below the stage.
She was Ye Wenjie, Ye Zhetai's daughter.
As the four girls were taking her father's life, she had tried to rush onto the stage. But two old university janitors held her down and whispered into her ear that she would lose her own life if she went. The mass struggle session had turned into a scene of madness, and her appearance would only incite more violence.
She had screamed and screamed, but she had been drowned out by the frenzied waves of slogans and cheers. When it was finally quiet again, she was no longer capable of making any sound. She stared at her father's lifeless body, and the thoughts she could not voice dissolved into her blood, where they would stay with her for the rest of her life.
After the crowd dispersed, she remained like a stone statue, her body and limbs in the positions they were in when the two old janitors had held her back.
After a long time, she finally let her arms down, walked slowly onto the stage, sat next to her father's body, and held one of his already-cold hands, her eyes staring emptily into the distance.
When they finally came to carry away the body, she took something from her pocket and put it into her father's hand: his pipe.
Wenjie quietly left the exercise grounds, empty save for the trash left by the crowd, and headed home.
When she reached the foot of the faculty housing apartment building, she heard peals of crazy laughter coming out of the second-floor window of her home. That was the woman she had once called mother.
Wenjie turned around, not caring where her feet would carry her.
Finally, she found herself at the door of Professor Ruan Wen.
Throughout the four years of Wenjie's college life, Professor Ruan had been her advisor and her closest friend.
During the two years after that, when Wenjie had been a graduate student in the Astrophysics Department, and through the subsequent chaos of the Cultural Revolution, Professor Ruan remained her closest confidante, other than her father.
Ruan had studied at Cambridge University, and her home had once fascinated Wenjie: refined books, paintings, and records brought back from Europe; a piano; a set of European-style pipes arranged on a delicate wooden stand, some made from Mediterranean briar, some from Turkish meerschaum. Each of them seemed suffused with the wisdom of the man who had once held the bowl in his hand or clamped the stem between his teeth, deep in thought, though Ruan had never mentioned the man's name. The pipe that had belonged to Wenjie's father had in fact been a gift from Ruan.
This elegant, warm home had once been a safe harbor for Wenjie when she needed to escape the storms of the larger world, but that was before Ruan's home had been searched and her possessions seized by the Red Guards. Like Wenjie's father, Ruan had suffered greatly during the Cultural Revolution.
During her struggle sessions, the Red Guards had hung a pair of high heels around her neck and streaked her face with lipstick to show how she had lived the corrupt lifestyle of a capitalist.
Wenjie pushed open the door to Ruan's home, and she saw that the chaos left by the Red Guards had been cleaned up: The torn oil paintings had been glued back together and rehung on the walls; the toppled piano had been set upright and wiped clean, though it was broken and could no longer be played; the few books left behind had been put back neatly on the shelf....
Ruan was sitting on the chair before her desk, her eyes closed.
Wenjie stood next to Ruan and gently caressed her professor's forehead, face, and hands—all cold. Wenjie had noticed the empty sleeping pill bottle on the desk as soon as she came in.
She stood there for a while, silent. Then she turned and walked away. She could no longer feel grief. She was now like a Geiger counter that had been subjected to too much radiation, no longer capable of giving any reaction, noiselessly displaying a reading of zero.
But as she was about to leave Ruan's home, Wenjie turned around for a final look. She noticed that Professor Ruan had put on makeup. She was wearing a light coat of lipstick and a pair of high heels.
Wang Miao drove along Jingmi Road until he was in Miyun County. From there he headed to Heilongtan, climbed up the mountain along a winding road, and arrived at the radio astronomy observatory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences' National Astronomical Center.
He saw a line of twenty-eight parabolic antenna dishes, each with a diameter of nine meters, like a row of spectacular steel plants. At the end were two tall radio telescopes with dishes fifty meters in diameter, built in 2006. As he drove closer, Wang could not help but think of the background in the picture of Ye and her daughter.
But the work of Sha Ruishan, Ye's student, had nothing to do with these radio telescopes. Dr. Sha's lab was mainly responsible for receiving the data transmitted from three satellites: the Cosmic Background Explorer, COBE, launched in November of 1989 and about to be retired; the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, WMAP, launched in 2003; and Planck, the space observatory launched by the European Space Agency in 2009.
Cosmic microwave background radiation very precisely matched the thermal black body spectrum at a temperature of 2.7255 K and was highly isotropic—meaning nearly uniform in every direction—with only tiny temperature fluctuations at the parts per million range.
Sha Ruishan's job was to create a more detailed map of the cosmic microwave background using observational data.
The lab wasn't very big. Equipment for receiving satellite data was squeezed into the main computer room, and three terminals displayed the information sent by the three satellites.
Sha was excited to see Wang. Clearly bored with his long isolation and happy to have a visitor, he asked Wang what kind of data he wanted to see.
"I want to see the overall fluctuation in the cosmic microwave background."
"Can you ... be more specific?"
"What I mean is ... I want to see the isotropic fluctuation in the overall cosmic microwave background, between one and five percent," he said, quoting from Shen's email.
Sha grinned. Starting at the turn of the century, the Miyun Radio Astronomy Observatory had opened itself to visitors. In order to earn some extra income, Sha often played the role of tour guide or gave lectures. This was the grin he reserved for tourists, as he had grown used to their astounding scientific illiteracy.
"Mr. Wang, I take it you're not a specialist in the field?"
"I work in nanotech."
"Ah, makes sense.
But you must have some basic understanding of the cosmic microwave background?"
"I don't know much.
I know that as the universe cooled after the big bang, the leftover 'embers' became the cosmic microwave background.
The radiation fills the entire universe and can be observed in the centimeter wavelength range.
I think it was back in the sixties when two Americans accidentally discovered the radiation when they were testing a supersensitive satellite reception antenna—"
"That's more than enough," Sha interrupted, waving his hands. "Then you must know that unlike the local variations we observe in different parts of the universe, the overall fluctuation in the cosmic microwave background is correlated with the expansion of the universe. It's a very slow change measured at the scale of the age of the universe. Even with the sensitivity of the Planck satellite, continuous observation for a million years might not detect any such shift. But you want to see a five percent fluctuation tonight?
Do you realize what that would mean?
The universe would flicker like a fluorescent tube that's about to burn out!"
And it will be flickering for me, Wang thought.
"This must be some joke from Professor Ye," Sha said.
"Nothing would please me more than to discover that it was a joke," Wang said. He was about to tell Sha that Ye didn't know the details of his request, but he was afraid that Sha would then refuse to help him.
"Well, since Professor Ye asked me to help you, let's do the observation. It's not a big deal. If you just need one percent precision, data from the antique COBE is sufficient."
As he spoke, Sha typed quickly at the terminal. Soon a flat green line appeared on the screen. "This curve is the real-time measurement of the overall cosmic microwave background—oh, calling it a straight line would be more accurate. The temperature is 2.725±0.002K. The error range is due to the Doppler effect from the motion of the Milky Way, which has already been filtered out.
If the kind of fluctuation you anticipate—in excess of one percent—occurs, this line would turn red and become a waveform.
I would bet that it's going to stay a flat green line until the end of the world, though. If you want to see it show the kind of fluctuation observable by the naked eye, you might have to wait until long after the death of the sun."
"I'm not interfering in your work, am I?"
"No. Since you need such low precision, we can just use some basic data from COBE.
Okay, it's all set. From now on, if such great fluctuations occur, the data will be automatically saved to disk."
"I think it might happen around one o'clock A.M."
"Wow, so precise!
No problem, since I'm working the night shift, anyway.
Have you had dinner yet?
Good, then I'll take you on a tour."
The night was moonless. They walked along the row of antenna dishes, and Sha pointed to them. "Breathtaking, aren't they?
It's too bad that they are all like the ears of a deaf man."
"Why?"
"Ever since construction was completed, interference has been unceasing in the observational bands. First, there were the paging stations during the eighties. Now, it's the scramble to develop mobile communications networks and cell towers.
These telescopes are capable of many scientific tasks—surveying the sky, detecting variable radio sources, observing the remains of supernovae—but we can't perform most of them.
We've complained to the State Regulatory Radio Commission many times, never with any results. How can we get more attention than China Mobile, China Unicom, China Netcom?
Without money, the secrets of the universe are worth shit.
At least my project only depends on satellite data and has nothing to do with these 'tourist attractions.'"
"In recent years, commercial operation of basic research has been fairly successful, like in high-energy physics.
Maybe it would be better if the observatories were built in places farther away from cities?"
"It all comes down to money.
Right now, our only choice is to find technical means to shield against interference.
Well, it would be much better if Professor Ye were here. She accomplished a lot in this field."
So the topic of conversation turned to Ye Wenjie.
And from her student, Wang finally learned about her life.
He listened as Sha told of how she witnessed the death of her father during the Cultural Revolution, how she was falsely accused at the Production and Construction Corps, how she then seemed to disappear until her return to Beijing at the beginning of the nineties, when she began teaching astrophysics at Tsinghua, where her father had also taught, until her retirement.
"It was only recently revealed that she had spent more than twenty years at Red Coast Base."
Wang was stunned. "You mean, those rumors—"
"Most turned out to be true.
One of the researchers who developed the deciphering system for the Red Coast Project emigrated to Europe and wrote a book last year. Most of the rumors you hear came out of that book.
Many who participated in Red Coast are still alive."
"That is ... a fantastical legend."
"Especially for it to happen during those years—absolutely incredible."
They continued to speak for a while. Sha asked the purpose behind Wang's strange request. Wang avoided giving a straight answer, and Sha didn't press.
The dignity of a specialist did not allow Sha to express too much interest in a request that clearly went against his professional knowledge.
Then they went to an all-night bar for tourists and sat for two hours. As Sha finished one beer after another, his tongue loosened even more. But Wang became anxious, and his mind kept returning to that green line on the terminal in Sha's office.
It was only at ten to one in the morning that Sha finally gave in to Wang's repeated pleas to go back to the lab.
The spotlights that had lit up the row of radio antennas had been turned off, and the antennas now formed a simple two-dimensional picture against the night sky like a series of abstract symbols. All of them gazed up at the sky at the same angle, as though waiting expectantly for something.
The scene made Wang shudder despite the warmth of the spring evening. He was reminded of the giant pendulums in Three Body.
They arrived back at the lab at one. As they looked at the terminal, the fluctuation was just getting started. The flat line turned into a wave, the distance between one peak and the next inconstant. The line's color became red, like a snake awakening after hibernation, wriggling as its skin refilled with blood.
"It must be a malfunction in COBE!"
Sha stared at the waveform, terrified.
"It's not a malfunction."
Wang's tone was exceedingly calm. He had learned to control himself when faced with such sights.
"We'll know soon enough," Sha said. He went to the other two terminals and typed rapidly to bring up the data gathered by the other two satellites, WMAP and Planck.
Now three waveforms moved in sync across the three terminals, exactly alike.
Sha took out a notebook computer and rushed to turn it on. He plugged in a network cable and picked up the phone. Wang could tell from the one-sided conversation that he was trying to get in touch with the Ürümqi radio astronomy observatory.
He didn't explain to Wang what he was doing, his eyes locked onto the browser window on the notebook. Wang could hear his rapid breathing.
A few minutes later, a red waveform appeared in the browser window, moving in step with the other three.
The three satellites and the ground-based observatory confirmed one fact: The universe was flickering.
"Can you print out the waveform?" Wang asked.
Sha wiped away the cold sweat on his forehead and nodded. He moved his mouse and clicked "Print."
Wang grabbed the first page as soon as it came out of the laser printer, and, with a pencil, began to match the distance between the peaks with the Morse code chart he took out of his pocket.
short-long-long-long-long, short-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-short-short, long-long-long-short-short-short, short-short-long-long-long, short-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-short-short-short, short-short-short-long-long, long-long-short-short-short. That's 1108:21:37, Wang thought.
short-long-long-long-long, short-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-short-short, long-long-long-short-short-short, short-short-long-long-long, short-long-long-long-long, long-long-long-short-short-short, short-short-short-long-long, long-short-short-short-short—that's 1108:21:36.
The countdown continued at the scale of the universe. Ninety-two hours had already elapsed, and only 1,108 hours remained.
Sha paced back and forth anxiously, pausing from time to time to look at the sequence of numbers Wang was writing down.
"Can't you tell me what's going on?" he shouted.
"I can't possibly explain this to you, Dr. Sha. Trust me."
Wang pushed away the pile of papers filled with waveforms. As he stared at the sequence of numbers, he said, "Maybe the three satellites and the observatory are all malfunctioning."
"You know that's impossible!"
"What if it's sabotage?"
"Also impossible!
To simultaneously alter the data from three satellites and an observatory on Earth?
You're talking about a supernatural saboteur."
Wang nodded. Compared to the idea of the universe flickering, he would prefer a supernatural saboteur.
But Sha then deprived him of this last glimmer of hope.
"It's easy to confirm this.
If the cosmic microwave background is fluctuating this much, we should be able to see it with our own eyes."
"What are you talking about?
The wavelength of the cosmic microwave background is seven centimeters. That's five orders of magnitude longer than the wavelength of visible light. How can we possibly see it?"
"Using 3K glasses."
"Three-K glasses?"
"It's a sort of science toy we made for the Capital Planetarium.
With our current level of technology, we could take the six-meter horn antenna used by Penzias and Wilson almost half a century ago to discover the cosmic microwave background and miniaturize it to the size of a pair of glasses. Then we added a converter in the glasses to compress the detected radiation by five orders of magnitude so that seven-centimeter waves are turned into visible red light.
This way, visitors can put on the glasses at night and observe the cosmic microwave background on their own. And now, we can use it to see the universe flicker."
"Where can I find these glasses?"
"At the Capital Planetarium. We made more than twenty pairs."
"I must get my hands on a pair before five."
Sha picked up the phone. The other side picked up only after a long while. Sha had to expend a lot of energy to convince the person awakened in the middle of the night to go to the planetarium and wait for Wang's arrival in an hour.
As Wang left, Sha said, "I won't go with you. What I've seen is enough, and I don't need any more confirmation.
But I hope that you will explain the truth to me when you feel the time is right. If this phenomenon should lead to some research result, I won't forget you."
Wang opened the car door and said, "The flickering will stop at five in the morning. I'd suggest you not pursue it after this. Believe me, you won't get anywhere."
Sha stared at Wang for a long time and then nodded. "I understand. Strange things have been happening to scientists lately...."
"Yes."
Wang ducked into the car. He didn't want to discuss the subject any further.
"Is it our turn?"
"It's my turn, at least."
Wang started the engine.
An hour later, Wang arrived at the new planetarium and got out of the car.
The bright lights of the city penetrated the translucent walls of the immense glass building and dimly revealed its internal structure.
Wang thought that if the architect had intended to express a feeling about the universe, the design was a success:
The more transparent something was, the more mysterious it seemed. The universe itself was transparent; as long as you were sufficiently sharp-eyed, you could see as far as you liked. But the farther you looked, the more mysterious it became.
The sleepy-eyed planetarium staffer was waiting by the door for Wang. He handed him a small suitcase and said, "There are five pairs of 3K glasses in here, all fully charged. The left button switches it on. The right dial is for adjusting brightness.
I have a dozen more pairs upstairs. You can look as much as you like, but I'm going to take a nap now in the room over there.
This Dr. Sha must be mental."
He went into the dim interior of the planetarium.
Wang opened the suitcase on the backseat of his car and took out a pair of 3K glasses. It resembled the display inside the panoramic viewing helmet of the V-suit.
He put the glasses on and looked around. The city looked the same as before, only dimmer. Then he remembered that he had to switch them on. The city turned into many hazy glowing halos. Most were fixed, but a few flickered or moved.
He realized that these were sources of radiation in the centimeter range, all now converted to visible light. At the heart of each halo was a radiation source. Because the original wavelengths were so long, it was impossible to see their shapes clearly.
He lifted his head and saw a sky glowing with a faint red light. Just like that, he was seeing the cosmic microwave background. The red light had come from more than ten billion years ago. It was the remnants of the big bang, the still-warm embers of Creation.
He could not see any stars. Normally, since visible light would be compressed to invisible by the glasses, each star should appear as a black dot. But the diffraction of centimeter-wave radiation overwhelmed all other shapes and details.
Once his eyes had grown used to the sight, Wang could see that the faint red background was indeed pulsing. The entire sky flickered, as if the universe was but a quivering lamp in the wind.
Standing under the flashing dome of the night sky, Wang suddenly felt the universe shrink until it was so small that only he was imprisoned in it.
The universe was a cramped heart, and the red light that suffused everything was the translucent blood that filled the organ. Suspended in the blood, he saw that the flickering of the red light was not periodic—the pulsing was irregular. He felt a strange, perverse, immense presence that could never be understood by human intellect.
Wang took off the 3K glasses and sat down weakly on the ground, leaning against the wheel of his car.
The city at night gradually recovered the reality of visible light. But his eyes roamed, trying to capture other sights.
By the entrance of the zoo across the street, there was a row of neon lights. One of the lights was about to burn out and flickered irregularly. Nearby, a small tree's leaves trembled in the night breeze, twinkling without pattern as they reflected streetlight. In the distance, the red star atop the Beijing Exhibition Center's Russian-style spire reflected the light from the cars passing below, also twinkling randomly....
Wang tried to interpret the flickers as Morse code.
He even felt that the wrinkles in the flags flapping next to him and the ripples in the puddle on the side of the road might be sending him messages.
He struggled to understand all the messages, and felt the passing of the countdown, second by second.
He didn't know how long he stayed there. The planetarium staffer finally emerged and asked him whether he was done.
But when he saw Wang's face, sleep disappeared from the staffer's eyes and was replaced by fear.
He packed up the 3K glasses, stared at Wang for a few seconds, and quickly left with the suitcase.
Wang took out his mobile and dialed Shen Yufei's number. She picked up right away. Perhaps she was also suffering from insomnia.
"What happens at the end of the countdown?" Wang asked.
"I don't know."
She hung up.
What can it be?
Maybe my own death, like Yang Dong's. Or maybe it will be a disaster like the great tsunami that swept through the Indian Ocean more than a decade ago. No one will connect it to my nanotech research. Could it be that every previous great disaster, including the two World Wars, was also the result of reaching the end of ghostly countdowns?
Could it be that every time there was someone like me, who no one thought of, who bore the ultimate responsibility? Or maybe it signals the end of the whole world. In this perverse world, that would be a relief.
One thing was certain. No matter what was at the end of the countdown, in the remaining one thousand or so hours, the possibilities would torture him cruelly, like demons, until he suffered a complete mental breakdown.
Wang ducked back into the car and left the planetarium.
Just before dawn, the roads were relatively empty. But he didn't dare to drive too fast, feeling that the faster the car moved, the faster the countdown would go.
When a glimmer of light appeared in the eastern sky, he parked and walked around aimlessly.
His mind was empty of thoughts: Only the countdown pulsed against the dim red background of cosmic radiation. He seemed to have turned into nothing but a simple timer, a bell that tolled for he knew not whom.
The sky brightened. He was tired, so he sat down on a bench.
When he lifted his head to see where his subconscious had brought him, he shivered.
He sat in front of St. Joseph's Church at Wangfujing.
In the pale white light of dawn, the church's Romanesque vaults appeared as three giant fingers pointing out something in space for him.
As Wang got up to leave, he was held back by a snippet of hymnal music.
It wasn't Sunday, so it was likely a choir rehearsal. The song was "Come, Gracious Spirit, Heavenly Dove."
As he listened to the solemn, sacred music, Wang Miao once again felt that the universe had shrunk until it was the size of an empty church. The domed ceiling was hidden by the flashing red light of the background radiation, and he was an ant crawling through the cracks in the floor.
He felt a giant, invisible hand caressing his trembling heart, and he was once again a helpless babe. Something deep in his mind that had once held him up softened like wax and collapsed.
He covered his eyes and began to cry.
"Hahaha, another one bites the dust!"
Wang's cries were interrupted by laughter. "Hahaha, another one bites the dust!" He turned around. Captain Shi Qiang stood there, blowing out a mouthful of white smoke.
The location for the Three Body players' meet-up was a small, out-of-the-way coffee shop.
Wang had always imagined game meet-ups would be lively events full of people, but this meet-up consisted of only seven players, including himself. Like Wang, the other six did not look like gaming enthusiasts.
Only two were relatively young. Another three, including a woman, were middle-aged. There was also an old man who appeared to be in his sixties or seventies.
Wang had originally thought that as soon as they met they'd begin a lively discussion of Three Body, but he was wrong.
The profound but strange content of Three Body had had a psychological impact on the participants. All the players, including Wang himself, couldn't bring it up easily.
They only made simple self-introductions. The old man took out a refined pipe, filled it with tobacco, and smoked as he strolled around, admiring the paintings on the walls.
The others sat silently, waiting for the meet-up organizer to show up. They had all come early.
Actually, of the six, Wang already knew two.
The old man was a famous scholar who had made his name by imbuing Eastern philosophy with the content of modern science.
The strangely dressed woman was a famous writer, one of those rare novelists who wrote in an avant-garde style but still had many readers. You could start one of her books on any page.
Of the two middle-aged men, one was a vice president at China's largest software company, plainly and casually dressed so that his status wasn't obvious at all; and the other was a high-level executive at the State Power Corporation.
Of the two young men, one was a reporter with a major media outlet, and the other was a doctoral student in the sciences.
Wang now realized that a considerable number of Three Body players were probably social elites like them.
The meet-up organizer showed up not long after. Wang's heart began to beat faster as soon as he saw the man: it was Pan Han, prime suspect for the murder of Shen Yufei.
He took out his phone when no one was looking and texted Shi Qiang.
"Haha, everyone got here early!"
Pan greeted them in a relaxed manner, as though nothing was wrong.
Appearing in the media, he usually looked disheveled, like a vagrant, but today, he was dressed sharply in a suit and dress shoes. "You're just like I imagined. Three Body is intended for people in your class because the common crowd cannot appreciate its meaning and mood. To play it well requires knowledge and understanding that ordinary people do not possess."
Wang sent out his text: Spotted Pan Han. At Yunhe Coffee Shop in Xicheng District.
Pan continued. "Everyone here is an excellent Three Body player. You have the best scores and are devoted to it.
I believe that Three Body is already an important part of your lives."
"It's part of what keeps me alive," the young doctoral student said.
"I saw it by accident on my grandson's computer," the old philosopher said, lifting his pipe stem. "The young man abandoned it after a few tries, saying it was too abstruse.
But I was attracted to it. I find it strange, terrible, but also beautiful. So much information is hidden beneath a simple representation."
A few players nodded at this description, including Wang himself.
Wang received Da Shi's reply text: We also see him. No worries. Carry on.
Play the fanatic in front of them, but not so much that you can't pull it off.
"Yes," the author agreed, and nodded.
"I like the literary elements of Three Body. The rises and falls of two hundred and three civilizations evoke the qualities of epics in a new form."
She mentioned 203 civilizations, but Wang had only experienced 184. This told Wang that Three Body progressed independently for each player, possibly with different worlds.
"I'm a bit sick of the real world," the young reporter said. "Three Body is already my second reality."
"Really?"
Pan asked, interested.
"Me too," the software company vice president said. "Compared to Three Body, reality is so vulgar and unexciting."
"It's too bad that it's only a game," said the power company executive.
"Very good," Pan said. Wang noticed his eyes sparkling with excitement.
"I have a question that I think everyone wants to know the answer to," Wang said.
"I know what it is. But you might as well ask."
"Is Three Body only a game?"
The other players nodded. Clearly the question was also on their minds.
Pan stood up and said solemnly, "The world of Three Body, or Trisolaris, really does exist."
"Where is it?" several players asked in unison.
After looking at each of them in turn, Pan sat down and spoke. "Some questions I can answer. Others I cannot. But if you are meant to be with Trisolaris, all your questions will be answered someday."
"Then ... does the game really portray Trisolaris accurately?" the reporter asked.
"First, the ability of Trisolarans to dehydrate through its many cycles of civilization is real. In order to adapt to the unpredictable natural environment and avoid extreme environmental conditions unsuitable for life, they can completely expel the water in their bodies and turn into dry, fibrous objects."
"What do Trisolarans look like?"
Pan shook his head. "I don't know. I really don't.
In every cycle of civilization, the appearance of Trisolarans is different. However, the game does portray something else that really existed on Trisolaris: the Trisolaran-formation computer."
"Ha! I thought that was the most unrealistic aspect," the software company vice president said. "I conducted a test with more than a hundred employees at my company. Even if the idea worked, a computer made of people would probably operate at a speed slower than manual computation."
Pan gave a mysterious smile. "You're right. But suppose that of the thirty million soldiers forming the computer, each one is capable of raising and lowering the black and white flags a hundred thousand times per second, and suppose also that the light cavalry soldiers on the main bus can run at several times the speed of sound, or even faster. Then the result would be very different.
"You asked about the appearance of the Trisolarans just now. According to some signs, the bodies of the Trisolarans who formed the computer were covered by a purely reflective surface, which probably evolved as a response to survival under extreme conditions of sunlight. The mirrorlike surface could be deformed into any shape, and they communicated with each other by focusing light with their bodies. This kind of light-speech could transmit information extremely rapidly and was the foundation of the Trisolaran-formation computer.
Of course, this was still a very inefficient machine, but it was capable of completing calculations that were too difficult to be performed manually.
The computer did in fact make its first appearance in Trisolaris as formations of people, before becoming mechanical and then electronic."
Pan stood up and paced behind the players.
"As a game, Three Body only borrows the background of human society to simulate the development of Trisolaris. This is done to give players a familiar environment. The real Trisolaris is very different from the world of the game, but the existence of the three suns is real. They're the foundation of the Trisolaran environment."
"Developing this game must have cost an enormous amount of effort," the vice president said. "But the goal is clearly not profit."
"The goal of Three Body is very simple and pure: to gather those of us who have common ideals," Pan said.
"What ideals do we have in common, exactly?"
Wang immediately regretted the question. He wondered whether asking it sounded hostile.
Pan studied everyone meaningfully, and then added in a soft voice, "How would you feel if Trisolaran civilization were to enter our world?"
"I would be happy." The young reporter was the first to break the silence. "I've lost hope in the human race after what I've seen in recent years. Human society is incapable of self-improvement, and we need the intervention of an outside force."
"I agree!" the author shouted. She was very excited, as though finally finding an outlet for pent-up feelings.
"The human race is hideous. I've spent the first half of my life unveiling this ugliness with the scalpel of literature, but now I'm even sick of the work of dissection.
I yearn for Trisolaran civilization to bring real beauty to this world."
Pan said nothing. That glint of excitement appeared in his eyes again.
The old philosopher waved his pipe, which had gone out. He spoke with a serious mien. "Let's discuss this question with a bit more depth: What is your impression of the Aztecs?"
"Dark and bloody," the author said. "Blood-drenched pyramids lit by insidious fires seen through dark forests.
Those are my impressions."
The philosopher nodded. "Very good. Then try to imagine: If the Spanish Conquistadors did not intervene, what would have been the influence of that civilization on human history?"
"You're calling black white and white black," the software company vice president said. "The Conquistadors who invaded the Americas were nothing more than murderers and robbers."
"Even so, at least they prevented the Aztecs from developing without bound, turning the Americas into a bloody, dark great empire. Then civilization as we know it wouldn't have appeared in the Americas, and democracy wouldn't have thrived until much later. Indeed, maybe they wouldn't have appeared at all.
This is the key to the question: No matter what the Trisolarans are like, their arrival will be good news for the terminally ill human race."
"But have you thought through the fact that the Aztecs were completely destroyed by the Western invaders?" the power company executive asked. He looked around, as though seeing these people for the first time. "Your thoughts are very dangerous."
"You mean profound!" the doctoral student said, raising a finger. He nodded vigorously at the philosopher. "I had the same thought, but I didn't know how to express it. You said it so well!"
After a moment of silence, Pan turned to Wang. "The other six have all given their views. What about you?"
"I stand with them," Wang said, pointing to the reporter and the philosopher.
He kept his answer simple. The less said the better.
"Very good," Pan said. He turned to the software company vice president and the power company executive. "The two of you are no longer welcome at this meet-up, and you are no longer appropriate players for Three Body.
Your IDs will be deleted. Please leave now.
Thank you."
The two stood up and looked at each other; then glanced around, confused, and left.
Pan held out his hand to the remaining five, shaking each person's hand in turn.
Then he said, solemnly, "We are comrades now."
The deaths of Lei and Yang were treated as accidents. Everybody at the base knew that Ye and Yang were a happy couple, and no one suspected her.
A new commissar came to the base, and life returned to its habitual peace. The tiny life inside Ye grew bigger every day, and she also felt the world outside change.
One day, the security platoon commander asked Ye to come to the gatehouse at the entrance to the base.
When she entered the gatehouse, she was surprised to see three children: two boys and a girl, about fifteen or sixteen. They all wore old coats and dog fur hats, obviously locals.
The guard on duty told her that they came from the village of Qijiatun. They had heard that the people on Radar Peak were learned and had come to ask some questions related to their studies.
Ye wondered how they dared to come onto Radar Peak.
This was a restricted military zone, and the guards were authorized to warn intruders only once before shooting.
The guard saw that Ye was puzzled and explained that they had just received orders that Red Coast Base's security rating had been reduced. The locals were allowed onto Radar Peak as long as they stayed outside the base. Several local peasants had already come yesterday to bring vegetables.
One of the children took out a worn-out middle school physics textbook. His hands were dirty and cracked like tree bark. In a thick Northeastern accent, he asked a simple physics question: The textbook said that a body in free fall is under constant acceleration but will always reach a terminal velocity. They had been thinking about this for several nights and could not understand why.
"You walked all this way just to ask this?" Ye asked.
"Teacher Ye, don't you know that they've restarted the exam?" the girl said excitedly.
"The exam?"
"The National College Entrance Exam!
Whoever studies hard and gets the best score gets to go to college!
It began two years ago. Didn't you know?"
"There's no need for recommendations anymore?"
"No. Anyone can take the exam. Even the children of the Five Black Categories in the village can take it."
Ye was stunned. This change left her with mixed feelings.
Only after a while did she realize that the children were still waiting with their books held up. She hurriedly answered their question, explaining that it was due to air resistance reaching equilibrium against the force of gravity. Then she promised that if they encountered any difficulties in their studies in the future, they could always come to her for help.
Three days later, seven children came to seek Ye. In addition to the three who had come last time, there were four more from villages located even farther away.
The third time, fifteen children came to find her, and even a teacher at a small-town high school came along. Because there was a shortage of teachers, he had to teach physics, math, and chemistry, and he came to ask Ye for some help on teaching.
The man was over fifty years old, and his face was already full of wrinkles. He was very nervous in front of Ye, and spilled books everywhere.
After they left the gatehouse, Ye heard him say to the students: "Children, that was a scientist. A real, bona fide scientist!"
After that, children would come to her for tutoring every few days. Sometimes there were so many of them that the gatehouse couldn't accommodate them all. With the permission of the officers in charge of base security, the guards would escort them to the cafeteria. There, Ye put up a small blackboard and taught the children.
It was dark by the time Ye got off work on the eve of Chinese New Year, 1980. Most people at the base had already left Radar Peak for the three-day holiday, and it was quiet everywhere.
Ye returned to her room. This was once the home of her and Yang Weining, but now it was empty, her only companion the unborn child within her.
In the night outside, the cold wind of the Greater Khingan Mountains screamed, carrying with it the faint sound of firecrackers going off in the village of Qijiatun.
Loneliness pressed down on Ye like a giant hand, and she felt herself being crushed; compressed until she was so small that she disappeared into an invisible corner of the universe....
Just then, someone knocked on her door. When she opened it, Ye first saw the guard, and then, behind him, the fire of several pine branch torches flickering in the cold wind. The torches were held aloft by a crowd of children, their faces bright red from the cold, and icicles hung from their hats. When they came into her room, they seemed to bring the cold air in with them.
Two of the boys, thinly dressed, had suffered the most. They had taken off their thick coats and wrapped them around something that they carried in their arms. Unwrapping the coats revealed a large pot, the fermented cabbage and pork dumplings inside still steaming hot.
That year, eight months after she sent her signal toward the sun, Ye went into labor. Because the baby was malpositioned and her body was weak, the base clinic couldn't handle her case and had to send her to the nearest town hospital.
This became one of the hardest times in Ye's life. After enduring a great deal of pain and losing a large amount of blood, she sank into a coma. Through a blur she could only see three hot, blinding suns slowly orbiting around her, cruelly roasting her body.
This state lasted for some time, and she hazily thought it was probably the end for her. It was her hell. The fire of the three suns would torment her and burn her forever. This was punishment for her betrayal, the betrayal that exceeded all others.
She sank into terror: not for her, but for her unborn child—was the child still in her?
Or had she already been born into this hell to suffer eternally with her?
She didn't know how much time had passed. Gradually the three suns moved farther away. After a certain distance, they suddenly shrank and turned into crystalline flying stars. The air around her cooled, and her pain lessened. She finally awoke.
Ye heard a cry next to her. Turning her head with great effort, she saw the baby's pink, wet, little face.
The doctor told Ye that she had lost more than 2,000 ml of blood. Dozens of peasants from Qijiatun had come to donate blood to her. Many of the peasants had children who Ye had tutored, but most had no connection to her at all, having only heard her name from the children and their parents. Without them, she would certainly have died.
Ye's living situation became a problem after the birth of her child. The difficult birth had damaged her health. It was impossible for her to stay at the base with the baby all by herself, and she had no relatives who could help.
Just then, an old couple living in Qijiatun came to talk to the base leaders and explained that they could take Ye and her baby home with them and take care of them.
The old man used to be a hunter and also gathered some herbs for traditional medicine. Later, after the forest around the area was lost to logging, the couple had turned to farming, but people still called him Hunter Qi out of habit.
They had two sons and two daughters. The daughters were married and had moved out. One of the sons was a soldier away from home, and the other was married and lived with them. The daughter-in-law had also just given birth.
Ye still hadn't been rehabilitated politically, and the base leadership was unsure about this suggested solution. But in the end, there was no other way, and so they allowed the couple to take Ye and the baby home from the hospital on a sled.
Ye lived for more than half a year with this peasant family in the Greater Khingan Mountains. She was so weak after giving birth that her milk did not come in. During this time, the baby girl, Yang Dong, was breastfed by all the women of the village.
The one who nursed her the most was Hunter Qi's daughter-in-law, called Feng. Feng had the strong, solid frame of the women of the Northeast. She ate sorghum every day, and her large breasts were full of milk even though she was feeding two babies at the same time.
Other nursing women in Qijiatun also came to feed Yang Dong. They liked her, saying that the baby had the same clever air as her mother.
Gradually, Hunter Qi's home became the gathering place for all the women of the village. Old and young, matrons and maidens, they all liked to stop by when they had nothing else going on. They admired Ye and were curious about her, and she found that she had many women's topics to discuss with them.
On countless days, Ye held Yang Dong and sat with the other women of the village in the yard, surrounded by birch posts. Next to her was a lazy black dog and the playing children, bathing in the warm sunlight.
She paid attention especially to the women with the copper tobacco pipes. Leisurely, they blew smoke out of their mouths, and the smoke, filled with sunlight, gave off a silvery glow much like the fine hairs on their plump limbs.
One time, one of them handed her the long-stemmed cupronickel pipe and told her it would make her feel better. She took only two hits before she became dizzy, and they laughed about it for several days.
As for the men, Ye had little to say to them. The matters that occupied them all day also seemed outside her understanding. She gathered that they were interested in planting some ginseng for cash while the government seemed to be relaxing policies a little, but they didn't quite have the courage to try.
They all treated Ye with great respect and were very polite toward her.
She didn't pay much attention to this at first. But after a while, after observing how those men roughly beat their wives and flirted outrageously with the widows in the village, saying things that made her blush, she finally realized how precious their respect was.
Every few days, one of them would bring a hare or pheasant he had caught to Hunter Qi's home. They also gave Yang Dong strange and quaint toys that they'd made with their own hands.
In Ye's memory, these months seemed to belong to someone else, like a segment of another life that had drifted into hers like a feather.
This period condensed in her memory into a series of classical paintings—not Chinese brush paintings but European oil paintings. Chinese brush paintings are full of blank spaces, but life in Qijiatun had no blank spaces. Like classical oil paintings, it was filled with thick, rich, solid colors.
Everything was warm and intense: the heated kang stove-beds lined with thick layers of ura sedge, the Guandong and Mohe tobacco stuffed in copper pipes, the thick and heavy sorghum meal, the sixty-five-proof baijiu distilled from sorghum—all of these blended into a quiet and peaceful life, like the creek at the edge of the village.
Most memorable to Ye were the evenings.
Hunter Qi's son was away in the city selling mushrooms—the first to leave the village to earn money elsewhere, so she shared a room in his house with Feng.
Back then, there was no electricity in the village, and every evening, the two huddled around a kerosene lamp. Ye would read while Feng did her needlework.
Ye would lean closer and closer to the lamp without noticing, and her bangs would often get singed, at which point the two of them would glance up and smile at each other.
Feng, of course, never had this happen to her. She had very sharp eyes, and could do detailed work even in the dim light from heating charcoal.
The two babies, not even half a year old, would be sleeping together on the kang next to them. Ye loved to watch them sleep, their even breathing the only sound in the room.
At first, Ye did not like sleeping on the heated kang, and often got sick, but she gradually got used to it. As she slept, she would imagine herself becoming a baby sleeping in someone's warm lap. The person who held her wasn't her father or mother, or her dead husband. She didn't know who it was. The feeling was so real that she would wake up with tears on her face.
One time, she put down her book and saw that Feng was holding the cloth shoe she was stitching over her knee and staring into the kerosene lamp without moving.
When she realized that Ye was looking at her, Feng asked, "Sister, why do you think the stars in the sky don't fall down?"
Ye examined Feng. The kerosene lamp was a wonderful artist and created a classical painting with dignified colors and bright strokes:
Feng had her coat draped over her shoulders, exposing her red belly-band, and a strong, graceful arm. The glow from the kerosene lamp painted her figure with vivid, warm colors, while the rest of the room dissolved into a gentle darkness. Close attention revealed a dim red glow, which didn't come from the kerosene lamp, but the heating charcoal on the ground. The cold air outside sculpted beautiful ice patterns on the windowpanes with the room's warm, humid air.
"You're afraid of the stars falling down?"
Ye asked softly.
Feng laughed and shook her head. "What's there to be afraid of?
They're so tiny."
Ye did not give her the answer of an astrophysicist. She only said, "They're very, very far away. They can't fall."
Feng was satisfied with this answer, and went back to her needlework.
But Ye could no longer be at peace. She put down her book and lay down on the warm surface of the kang, closing her eyes. In her imagination, the rest of the universe around their tiny cottage disappeared, just the way the kerosene lamp hid most of the room in darkness.
Then she substituted the universe in Feng's heart for the real one.
The night sky was a black dome that was just large enough to cover the entirety of the world. The surface of the dome was inlaid with countless stars shining with a crystalline silver light, none of which was bigger than the mirror on the old wooden table next to the bed.
The world was flat and extended very far in each direction, but ultimately there was an edge where it met the sky.
The flat surface was covered with mountain ranges like the Greater Khingan Mountains, and with forests dotted with tiny villages, just like Qijiatun....
This toy-box-like universe comforted Ye, and gradually it shifted from her imagination into her dreams.
In this tiny mountain hamlet deep in the Greater Khingan Mountains, something finally thawed in Ye Wenjie's heart. In the frozen tundra of her soul, a tiny, clear lake of meltwater appeared.
Ye eventually returned to Red Coast Base with Yang Dong. Another two years passed, divided between anxiety and peace.
Ye then received a notice: Both she and her father had been politically rehabilitated. Soon after, a letter arrived for her from Tsinghua, stating that she could return to teach right away.
Accompanying the letter was a sum of money: the back pay owed to her father after his rehabilitation.
Finally, at base meetings, her supervisors could call her comrade.
Ye faced all these changes with equanimity, showing no sign of excitement or elation.
She had no interest in the outside world, only wanting to stay at the quiet, out-of-the-way Red Coast Base. But for the sake of Yang Dong's education, she finally left the base that she had once thought would be her home for the rest of her life, and returned to her alma mater.
Leaving the mountains, Ye felt spring was everywhere. The cold winter of the Cultural Revolution really was over, and everything was springing back to life.
Even though the calamity had just ended, everything was in ruins, and countless men and women were licking their wounds. The dawn of a new life was already evident.
Students with children of their own appeared on college campuses; bookstores sold out of famous literary works; technological innovation became the focus in factories; and scientific research now enjoyed a sacred halo.
Science and technology were the only keys to opening the door to the future, and people approached science with the faith and sincerity of elementary school students. Though their efforts were naïve, they were also down-to-earth.
At the first National Conference on Science, Guo Moruo, president of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, declared that it was the season of rebirth and renewal for China's battered science establishment.
Was this the end of the madness?
Were science and rationality really coming back?
Ye asked herself these questions repeatedly.
Ye never again received any communication from Trisolaris.
She knew that she would have to wait at least eight years to hear that world's response to her message, and after leaving the base, she no longer had any way of receiving extraterrestrial replies.
It was such an important thing, and yet she had done it all by herself. This gave her a sense of unreality.
As time passed, that sense grew ever stronger. What had happened resembled an illusion, a dream.
Could the sun really amplify radio signals?
Did she really use it as an antenna to send a message about human civilization into the universe?
Did she really receive a message from the stars?
Did that blood-hued morning, when she had betrayed the entire human race, really happen?
And those murders ...
Ye tried to numb herself with work so as to forget the past—and almost succeeded. A strange kind of self-protective instinct caused her to stop recalling the past, to stop thinking about the communication she had once had with another civilization. Her life passed this way, day after day, in tranquility.
After she had been back at Tsinghua for a while, Ye took Dong Dong to see her grandmother, Shao Lin.
After her husband's death, Shao had soon recovered from her mental breakdown and found ways to survive in the tiny cracks of politics.
Her attempts to chase the political winds and shout the right slogans finally paid off, and later, during the "Return to Class, Continue the Revolution" phase, she went back to teaching.
But then Shao did something that no one expected. She married a persecuted high-level cadre from the Education Ministry. At that time, the cadre still lived in a "cowshed" for reform through labor.
This was part of Shao's long-term plan. She knew that the chaos in society could not last long. The young rebels who were attacking everything in sight had no experience in managing a country. Sooner or later, the persecuted and sidelined old cadres would be back in power.
Her gamble paid off. Even before the end of the Cultural Revolution, her husband was partially restored to his old position. After the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh CPC Central Committee, he was soon promoted to the level of a deputy minister.
Based on this background, Shao Lin also rose quickly as intellectuals became favored again.
After becoming a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, she very wisely left her old school and was promoted to be the vice president of another famous university.
Ye Wenjie saw this new version of her mother as the very model of an educated woman who knew how to take care of herself. There was not a hint of the persecution that she went through.
She enthusiastically welcomed Ye and Dong Dong, inquired after Ye's life during those years with concern, exclaimed that Dong Dong was so cute and smart, and meticulously directed the cook in preparing Ye's favorite dishes.
Everything was done with skill, practice, and the appropriate level of care.
But Ye could clearly detect an invisible wall between her mother and herself. They carefully avoided sensitive topics and never mentioned Ye's father.
After dinner, Shao Lin and her husband accompanied Ye and Dong Dong down to the street to say good-bye. Then Shao Lin returned home while the deputy minister asked to have a word with Ye.
In a moment, the deputy minister's kind smile turned to frost, as though he had impatiently pulled off his mask. "We're happy to have you and the child visit in the future under one condition: Do not try to pursue old historical debts.
Your mother bears no responsibility for your father's death. She was a victim as well.
Your father clung to his own faith in a manner that was not healthy and walked all the way down a blind alley. He abandoned his responsibility to his family and caused you and your mother to suffer."
"You have no right to speak of my father," Ye said, anger suffusing her voice. "This is between my mother and me. It has nothing to do with you."
"You're right," Shao Lin's husband said coldly. "I'm only passing on a message from your mother."
Ye looked up at the residential apartment building reserved for high-level cadres. Shao Lin had lifted a corner of the curtain to peek down at them.
Without a word, Ye bent down to pick up Dong Dong and left. She never returned.
Ye searched and searched for information about the four female Red Guards who had killed her father, and eventually managed to locate three of them.
All three had been sent down to the countryside and then returned, and all were unemployed.
After Ye got their addresses, she wrote a brief letter to each of them, asking them to meet her at the exercise grounds where her father had died. Just to talk.
Ye had no desire for revenge.
Back at Red Coast Base, on that morning of the transmission, she had gotten revenge against the entire human race, including those Red Guards. But she wanted to hear these murderers repent, wanted to see even a hint of the return of humanity.
That afternoon after class, Ye waited for them on the exercise grounds.
She didn't have much hope, and was almost certain that they wouldn't show up. But at the time of the appointment, the three old Red Guards came.
Ye recognized them from a distance because they were all dressed in now-rare green military uniforms.
When they came closer, she realized that the uniforms were likely the same ones they had worn at that mass struggle session. The clothes had been laundered until their color had faded, and they had been conspicuously patched.
Other than the uniforms, the three women in their thirties no longer resembled the three young Red Guards who had looked so valiant on that day. They had lost not only youth, but also something else.
The first impression Ye had was that, though the three had once seemed to be carved out of the same mold, they now looked very different from each other.
One had become very thin and small, and her uniform hung loose on her. Already showing her age, her back was bent and her hair had a yellow tint. Another had become thick framed, so that the uniform jacket she wore could not even be buttoned. Her hair was messy and her face dark, as though the hardship of life had robbed her of any feminine refinement, leaving behind only numbness and rudeness. The third woman still had hints of her youthful appearance, but one of her sleeves was now empty and hung loose as she walked.
The three old Red Guards stood in front of Ye in a row—just like they had stood against Ye Zhetai—trying to recapture their long-forgotten dignity. But the demonic spiritual energy that had once propelled them was gone.
The thin woman's face held a mouselike expression. The thickset woman's face showed only numbness. The one-armed woman gazed up at the sky.
"Did you think we wouldn't dare to show up?" the thickset woman asked, her tone trying to be provocative.
"I thought we should see each other. There should be some closure to the past," Ye said.
"The past is finished. You should know that."
The thin woman's voice was sharp, as though she was always frightened of something.
"I meant spiritual closure."
"Then you want to hear us repent?" the thick woman asked.
"Don't you think you should?"
"Then who will repent to us?" the one-armed woman asked.
The thickset woman said, "Of the four of us, three had signed the big-character poster at the high school attached to Tsinghua. Revolutionary tours, the great rallies in Tiananmen, the Red Guard Civil Wars, First Red Headquarters, Second Red Headquarters, Third Red Headquarters, Joint Action Committee, Western Pickets, Eastern Pickets, New Peking University Commune, Red Flag Combat Team, The East is Red—we went through every single milestone in the history of the Red Guards from birth to death."
The one-armed woman took over. "During the Hundred-Day War at Tsinghua, two of us were with the Jinggang Mountain Corps, and the other two were with the April Fourteenth Faction.
I held a grenade and attacked a homemade tank from the Jinggang Mountain faction. My arm was crushed by the treads on the tank. My blood and muscle and bones were ground into the mud. I was only fifteen years old."
"Then, we were sent to the wilderness!"
The thickset woman raised her arms. "Two of us were sent to Shaanxi, the other two to Henan, all to the most remote and poorest corners.
When we first went, we were still idealistic, but that didn't last. After a day of laboring in the fields, we were so tired that we couldn't even wash our clothes.
We lay in leaky straw huts and listened to wolves cry in the night, and gradually we woke from our dreams.
We were stuck in those forgotten villages and no one cared about us at all."
The one-armed woman stared at the ground numbly. "While we were down in the countryside, sometimes, on a trail across the barren hill, I'd bump into another Red Guard comrade or an enemy. We'd look at each other: the same ragged clothes, the same dirt and cow shit covering us. We had nothing to say to each other."
The thickset woman stared at Ye. "Tang Hongjing was the girl who gave your father the fatal strike with her belt. She drowned in the Yellow River.
There was a flood that carried off a few of the sheep kept by the production team. So the Party secretary called to the sent-down students, 'Revolutionary youths! It's time to test your mettle!'
And so, Hongjing and three other students jumped into the river to save the sheep. It was early spring, and the surface of the river was still covered by a thin layer of ice.
All four died, and no one knew if it was from drowning or freezing.
When I saw their bodies ...
I ... I ... can't fucking talk about this anymore."
She covered her eyes and sobbed.
The thin woman sighed, tears in her eyes. "Then, later, we returned to the city. But so what if we're back?
We still have nothing. Rusticated youths who have returned don't lead very good lives. We can't even find the worst jobs. No job, no money, no future. We have nothing."
Ye had no words.
The one-armed woman said, "There was a movie called Maple recently. I don't know if you've seen it.
At the end, an adult and a child stand in front of the grave of a Red Guard who had died during the faction civil wars. The child asks the adult, 'Are they heroes?'
The adult says no. The child asks, 'Are they enemies?'
The adult again says no. The child asks, 'Then who are they?'
The adult says, 'History.'"
"Did you hear that?"
The thickset woman waved an arm excitedly at Ye. "History! History! It's a new age now. Who will remember us? Who will think of us, including you?
Everyone will forget all this completely!"
The three old Red Guards departed, leaving only Ye on the exercise grounds. More than a dozen years ago, on that rainy afternoon, she had stood alone here as well, gazing at her dead father.
The old Red Guard's final remark echoed endlessly in her mind....
The setting sun cast a long shadow from Ye's slender figure.
The small sliver of hope for society that had emerged in her soul had evaporated like a drop of dew in the sun. Her tiny sense of doubt about her supreme act of betrayal had also disappeared without a trace.
I did not leave that night—Chen Qingyang caught me and asked me to stay in the name of our great friendship.
She admitted that she'd been wrong to slap me, and that she hadn't treated me well. But she said my great friendship was phony, and the reason I had tricked her into coming was to study her anatomy.
I said if she thought I was a faker, why did she believe me?
I did want to study her anatomy, but that was with her permission, too.
If she didn't like the idea, she could have told me before. In any case, slapping me was unfair.
She laughed hard for a while and said she simply couldn't bear the sight of that thing on my body.
It looked silly and shameless, and whenever she saw him, she just couldn't help getting angry.
We didn't have a stitch on while we argued.
My little Buddha still stuck out, glittering in the moonlight as if wrapped in plastic.
I was a little offended by what she said and she realized that too.
So to make peace, she softened her tone and said, "Anyway, he is breathtakingly ugly—don't you agree?"
Standing there like an angry cobra, the thing was indeed homely.
I said, since you don't even want to look at him, let's just forget the whole thing.
I began to put on my pants, but again she said, Don't!
So I started smoking.
The moment I had the cigarette finished, she embraced me and we did it on the grass.
Until my twenty-first birthday I was a virgin, but that night I lured Chen Qingyang up the mountain with me.
At first there was moonlight, then the moon set and a sky full of stars came out, as numerous as dewdrops in the morning.
There was no wind that night either; the mountain was very still.
Having made love to Chen Qingyang, I was no longer a virgin.
However, I wasn't feeling happy at all.
That was because when I was doing it, she didn't make a sound; she simply put her arms under her head and looked at me in a very thoughtful way. So from beginning to end it was just my solo performance.
In fact, I didn't last too long. I finished almost right away.
After that I was angry and upset.
Chen Qingyang said she couldn't believe it: I actually had the impudence to display my ugly male organ in front of her, without feeling the least embarrassed.
The thing didn't feel embarrassed either; it just forced its way straight into the hole between her thighs.
Because there is this hole in a woman's body, a man thinks he has to use it, which just doesn't make sense.
When she had a husband before, he did this to her every day.
All the time she kept the question to herself, waiting for the day when he felt ashamed of himself and would explain why he did this to her.
But he never apologized, and then he went to prison.
These were things I didn't want to hear.
So I asked her if she hadn't felt like doing it, why had she agreed?
She said she didn't want to be considered small-minded.
I said, You're a small-minded person anyway.
Then she said, Never mind, let's not fight about it.
She told me to return that evening, and we'd try it one more time.
Maybe she'd like it.
I didn't say anything.
In the foggy dawn, I left her and went down the mountain to herd buffalo.
I didn't go to see her that night, instead I went to the hospital, the reason being: when I got to the cattle pen in the morning, a bunch of people couldn't wait for me and had opened the pen and dragged the buffalo out.
Everyone was trying to pick out a strong one for plowing the fields.
A local youth called Shan Men Er was pulling out a large white one.
I went over to tell him that the buffalo had been bitten by a poisonous snake and couldn't work.
He didn't seem to hear me, so I snatched the tether from him and he slapped me without thinking.
I shoved him right in the chest, pushing him down on his butt.
Then people began to gather, forming a tight ring around us and urging us to fight.
With the students from Beijing on one side and the country boys on the other, everyone chose a weapon, either a wooden stick or a leather belt.
They argued for a while, then decided not to fight but to make Shan Men Er and I wrestle. Unable to beat me at wrestling, Shan Men Er began to punch me.
I kicked him into a manure pit right in front of the cattle pen for a shit bath.
He got up, grabbed a pitchfork, and tried to stab me, but somebody stopped him.
That was what happened in the morning.
When I came back from herding buffalo in the evening, the team leader accused me of beating peasants, saying that he was going to call a meeting to denounce me.
I told him that he could take his chances and give me trouble, but I was no pushover.
I also told him that I would get some people together for a gang fight.
The team leader said he didn't want to give me a hard time; it was Shan Men Er's mother who was giving him a hard time.
The woman was a widow, a real bitch.
He said that's the way it goes around here.
Later he said he was not going to arrange a denouncing meeting but a helping meeting. I could just stand in front of people and do a self-criticism.
If I still didn't agree, he was going to let the widow come after me.
The meeting was a complete mess.
The locals all talked at once, saying that the city students had gone too far—we not only took their chickens and stole their dogs, but also beat their people.
The city students said, That's bullshit! Who stole your chickens and dogs? Did you catch us in the act?
We're here to build up our country's borderland. We aren't some criminals in exile. Why should we put up with casual slander?
Standing in front of the crowd, I didn't do self-criticism but called them names.
I didn't expect Shan Men Er's mother to sneak up from behind, pick up a heavy stool, and slam my lower back, right on my old injury. I passed out instantly.
By the time I came around, Luo Xiaosi had gathered a group of city students and was threatening to burn the cattle pen. He also said he'd make Shan Men Er's mother pay with her life.
The team leader took a bunch of locals to stop them. Meanwhile, the vice team leader told someone to take me to the hospital on an ox cart.
The nurse said they shouldn't try to move me since my back was broken, and I'd be done for.
I said, My back seems OK and you guys can just carry me.
However, since none of them was sure about whether or not my back was broken, they were all afraid to move me.
So I had no choice but to stay put.
Finally, the team leader came over and said, Go phone Chen Qingyang. Let her check his back.
After a short while, Chen Qingyang ran over, with messy hair and puffy eyelids. The first thing she said was: Don't worry. If you're paralyzed, I'll take care of you for the rest of my life.
Then she checked my back and her diagnosis was the same as mine.
So they carried me to the ox cart and sent me to the hospital at the farm headquarters.
That night Chen Qingyang accompanied me to the hospital and waited until the x-ray of my lower back was developed. She left after making sure everything was fine.
She said she would come back to visit me in a couple of days, but she never did.
I was hospitalized for a whole week, and once I could get around, I went straight back to see her.
When I walked into Chen Qingyang's clinic, I carried so many things on my back that my pack was overflowing.
In addition to a wok, bowls, a basin, and ladle, there was enough food for two of us to eat for an entire month.
When she saw me come into her clinic, she gave me a faint smile and said, Are you completely recovered? Where are you going with all that stuff?
I said I was going to the Qingping thermal springs to bathe.
She leaned back languidly in her chair and said, That's a great idea.
The thermal springs might cure your old injury.
I said I wasn't really going to the thermal springs. I just wanted to stay on the back slope of the mountain for a few days.
She said there is nothing on the back of the mountain. Better go to the thermal springs.
The Qingping thermal springs were mud pools located in a valley, surrounded by nothing but wild, grassy hills.
The people who built huts on the hills and lived there year-round were usually patients with a variety of diseases.
If I went there, not only wouldn't it cure the pain in my lower back, but worse, I might get leprosy.
However, the lowland on the back slope of the deserted mountain was crisscrossed with gullies and ditches; and fragrant grass grew lush in the sparse woods. I could build a thatched hut in some deserted spot, an empty mountain with no human trace—gurgling water with fallen petals. A place like that would help cultivate morality and nourish the inner nature.
When Chen Qingyang heard this she couldn't help smiling. How do you get to that place?
Maybe I'll go there to visit you.
I gave her directions and even made a map for her, and then went into the mountains alone.
After I got to the desolate mountainside, Chen Qingyang didn't come to see me right away.
The strong wind of the dry season blew endlessly, shaking the thatched hut.
Sitting in a chair and listening to the sound of the wind, Chen Qingyang would look back at what happened and begin to have doubts about everything.
It was hard for her to believe that she had come to these backwoods in a haze, had begun to be called damaged goods for no reason, and then turned into real damaged goods.
The whole thing was just unbelievable.
Chen Qingyang said that sometimes she would step out of her room and look in the direction of the back slope of the mountain, seeing the many paths winding through the valley and leading deep into the mountains.
My words still echoed in her ears.
She knew that any of those paths would take her to me.
There was no doubt about it.
But the more certain something was, the more doubtful it became.
Maybe the path didn't lead anywhere; maybe Wang Er was not in the mountains; maybe Wang Er didn't exist at all.
A couple of days later, Luo Xiaosi brought several people to the hospital to see me.
No one in the hospital had ever heard of Wang Er, so nobody knew where he had gone.
At the time the hospital was rampant with hepatitis. The uninfected patients all fled to their homes to recuperate, and the doctors went down to the production team to provide medical care.
Luo Xiaosi came back to the fourteenth team and found my stuff gone, so he went to ask the team leader whether he had seen me.
The team leader said, Who's Wang Er?
Never heard of him.
Luo Xiaosi said, Just a few days ago you called a meeting to denounce him, and the vixen hit him with a stool and almost killed him.
Having been reminded that way, the team leader was even more reluctant to refresh his memory about me.
It just so happened that at the time a relief delegation from Beijing was coming to investigate how the city students were treated in the countryside, especially whether any had been tied up, beaten, or forced to marry the locals. Because of this, the team leader was even more unwilling to remember me.
Luo Xiaosi then made his way to the fifteenth team, asking Chen Qingyang whether she had seen me, and hinting in a roundabout sort of way that she'd had an indecent relationship with me.
Chen Qingyang then told him that she knew nothing about me.
By the time Luo Xiaosi left, Chen Qingyang was confused.
It seemed many people didn't believe Wang Er so much as existed.
That's what confused people.
What everyone thinks exists must not exist, because everything before our eyes is illusion; what everyone doesn't think exists must exist, like Wang Er. If he didn't exist, where did his name come from?
Unable to overcome her curiosity, Chen Qingyang finally dropped everything and went up the mountain to look for me.
After the vixen knocked me out with a stool, Chen Qingyang ran all the way down the mountain to see me.
She even cried in public and declared that if I didn't recover, she would take care of me all her life.
It turned out not only did I live, but I wasn't even paralyzed, which was a good thing for me though she wasn't crazy about it.
It was almost as if she'd confessed publicly that she was damaged goods.
If I'd died, or become paralyzed, it would have then been morally justified. But I had only stayed in the hospital for a week and then run away.
To her, I was the precise image of someone seen from behind, hurrying down the mountain, a man in her memory.
She didn't want to make love to me, nor did she want to carry on a love affair with me either. So, without a very important reason, her visiting me would be the act of a woman who was truly damaged goods.
Chen Qingyang said that when she decided to head up the mountain to search for me, she didn't have anything on under her white smock.
Dressed like this, she crossed a stretch of hills behind the fifteenth team.
Those hills were thick with grass, and under the grass lay red soil.
In the morning the wind blew down the mountain to the plateau, cold as a mountain spring, and in the afternoon the wind returned, full of heat and dust.
Chen Qingyang came riding on a white wind to look for me.
The wind got under her clothes and flowed all over her body, like caresses and lips.
In fact, she didn't really need me, nor did she have to find me.
When people said she was damaged goods and I was her lover, she came to see me every day.
It seemed necessary back then, though.
Ever since she admitted in public she was damaged goods, and I was her lover, no one said she was damaged goods anymore, let alone mentioned my name in front of her (except for Luo Xiaosi).
People were so afraid of this kind of damaged-goods behavior in broad daylight that they didn't even dare talk about it.
As for the Beijing relief delegation sent to investigate the city students' situation, everyone in the local area knew about it except for me.
That was because lately I had been off herding buffalo, which required going out early in the morning and coming back late at night; besides that, I had a bad reputation and no one bothered to tell me. Later, when I was in the hospital, nobody came to see me either.
When I left the hospital, I went deep into the mountains almost right away.
I saw only two people before my trip, one of whom was Chen Qingyang, who hadn't mentioned it; the other one was our team leader, who also hadn't said anything other than telling me to take a good rest at the thermal springs.
I told him that I didn't have anything (food, utensils, etc.), so I couldn't go to the thermal springs.
He said he could lend me some things.
I told him that I might not be able to return them. He said it didn't matter.
So I borrowed plenty of homemade smoked meat and sausages.
Chen Qingyang didn't give me the information because she didn't care about it—she was not one of the city students.
The team leader didn't tell me because he thought I knew already.
He also thought that since I took so much food with me I probably wouldn't come back.
That was why when Luo Xiaosi asked him where Wang Er had gone, he said, Wang Er?
Who's Wang Er?
Never heard of him.
For those like Luo Xiaosi, it would have been a great advantage to find me—I could prove that the city students in the area were treated badly, often beaten senseless.
For our team leader, my nonexistence was very convenient, because then no one could prove any of the city students had been beaten senseless.
To me, it didn't really matter whether I existed or not.
If no one came to look for me, I could grow some corn around the place and never leave.
So I didn't really care whether I existed or not.
I also thought about the problem of whether I existed or not in my little thatched hut.
For example, others believed that Chen Qingyang had slept with me and that proved my existence.
In Luo Xiaosi's words, Wang Er and Chen Qingyang took off their pants and screwed.
Actually he didn't see any of it, but the extent of his imagination was that we took off our pants.
And there was Chen Qingyang, who said that I hurried down the mountain in my green fatigues.
It never crossed my mind that I didn't look back as I walked.
Since I couldn't imagine these things, they must be evidence of my existence.
Then there was this little Buddha of mine, stiff and straight, and that was something I couldn't invent either.
I always expected Chen Qingyang to come to see me, but she never came.
By the time she finally showed up, I had learned not to expect her.
I used to believe that Chen Qingyang would come to see me immediately after I went up the mountain, but I was wrong.
I waited for a long time and then decided to give up.
I sat in my little hut, listening to the leaves rustling all over the mountain, finally reaching a state where object and subject were both forgotten.
I listened to the mighty air currents surging over my head, and just then a wave rose from my soul, as flowers bloom in the midst of the mountains and bamboo husks fall from the shoots and the bamboo stands up straight.
When the wave receded, I would rest calmly, but I wanted to dance while the wave was at its peak.
Chen Qingyang arrived at my thatched hut precisely at that moment and caught sight of me sitting naked on the bamboo bed. My penis was like a skinned rabbit, red, shiny, and a foot long, frankly erect. Panicked, Chen Qingyang immediately screamed.
Chen Qingyang's search for me could be summed up as follows: Two weeks after I went into the mountains, she went up the mountains to look for me.
It was only two o'clock in the afternoon, but she took off her underwear, like women who sneak out for sex at midnight, and wore only a white smock, walking barefoot in the mountains.
She crossed a sunlit meadow, entered a dry gully, and walked for a long time.
Even through the maze of gullies, she didn't make a single wrong turn.
Later she emerged from the gully, walked into a valley facing the sun, and saw a thatched hut that seemed newly built.
If there had been no Wang Er to tell her the route, she wouldn't have been able to find such a tiny hut in the vast, wild mountains.
But as she entered the hut and saw Wang Er sitting on the bed, his little Buddha stiff, she was frightened into screaming.
Later Chen Qingyang said she just couldn't believe everything she had experienced was real, because something real needs to have a cause.
Yet at the time she just took off her white smock, sat beside me, and stared at my little Buddha, thinking he was the color of a burn scar.
Just then my thatched hut began to shake in the wind, streams of sunlight leaked through the roof and spattered her body, like stars.
I reached out my hand and touched her nipples, until her face flushed and her nipples turned hard.
Suddenly she woke from her trance, her face blushing with embarrassment.
Then she embraced me tightly.
It was the second time that I made love to Chen Qingyang. When we first made love, many details puzzled me.
Not until much later did I finally figure out how much she had really taken to heart being called damaged goods.
Since she couldn't prove she wasn't damaged goods, she consented to becoming damaged goods, like the women caught in the act and summoned on stage to confess the details of their adultery.
The confessions would reach a point when the audience, unable to restrain themselves, their faces twisted into hundreds of masks of lust, would shout, Tie her up!
Then someone would rush onto the stage and bind her into the loops of a five-petal knot with thin hemp twine. She stood like this in front of the crowd, submitting herself to all the shame and insults.
That didn't bother her at all.
She wouldn't have been afraid of being stripped naked, strapped to a millstone, and thrown into a pond; nor would she have feared being forced to dress up, like the wives and concubines of wealthy men, their faces covered with water-soaked yellow paper, sitting upright until they smothered to death.
No, these things wouldn't have bothered her at all.
She was not the least bit worried about becoming actual damaged goods, which she much preferred to being damaged goods in name only.
What disgusted her was the act that made her damaged goods.
When I made love to Chen Qingyang, a lizard crawled out of a crack in the wall and crossed the ground in the middle of the room, moving intermittently.
Then suddenly startled, it fled quickly, disappearing into the sunshine outside the door.
Just at that moment Chen Qingyang's moans flooded out, filling the entire room.
I was scared and stopped, leaning over her body.
But she pinched my leg and said: Hurry, you idiot!
I sped up and waves of vibration passed through me as if from the earth's core.
Afterward, she said she had fallen deep into sin and karma would catch up with her sooner or later.
When she said that, the band of flush was fading from her chest.
At the time we hadn't finished our business yet.
So she made it sound like she would only be punished for what she had just done.
Suddenly a shudder traveled from the top of my head to my tailbone and I began to ejaculate wildly.
Since this had nothing to do with her, perhaps I would be the only one punished for it.
Later Chen Qingyang told me that Luo Xiaosi had looked for me everywhere.
He went to the hospital, and people there told him that I didn't exist; then he went to our team leader, who also said that I didn't exist; finally, he went to Chen Qingyang. Chen Qingyang told him that since everyone said he didn't exist, maybe he didn't. She had no problem with that.
When he heard this, Luo Xiaosi couldn't help crying.
I felt very strange after I heard her words.
I shouldn't come into existence simply because a vixen hit me, nor should I stop existing because she hit me.
Actually, my existence was an indisputable fact.
So I became obsessed.
To prove the indisputable fact, I went down the mountain the day the relief delegation arrived and took part in the delegation's hearing.
After the hearing, the team leader said, You don't look sick at all.
I think you'd better come back to feed the pigs.
He also arranged for people to trail Chen Qingyang and me, trying to catch us in the act of adultery.
Of course, it was not easy to catch me because I walked so fast.
No one could successfully track me.
However, this got me into a lot more trouble.
By then I began to realize that it was really unnecessary for me to prove my existence to others.
When I fed the pigs for the production team, every day I had to carry buckets of water.
It was really a tiring job, and impossible to slack off. The pigs would squeal if they didn't get enough food.
I had to chop tons of vegetables and cut piles of wood.
Originally there had been three women to do the job, but now the team leader assigned it all to me.
I found that I could not manage three women's work, especially when my back hurt.
I really wanted to prove that I didn't exist then.
At night Chen Qingyang and I would make love in my small hut.
In those days, I was full of respect for the task, enthusiastic about every kiss and caress.
Whether it was the classical missionary position, or man-from-behind position, man-from-side position, or woman-on-top position, I performed them in sober earnest.
Chen Qingyang was very satisfied with my performance, and so was I.
At those moments, I felt it was unnecessary to prove my existence.
I drew a conclusion from these experiences: never let other people pay attention to you!
Beijingers say: Better a thief should steal from you than keep you in mind.
You should never let other people keep you in mind.
After a while, the city students in our team were all transferred to other positions; the men landed work at the candy factory, and the women got to teach at the agricultural middle school.
I was the only one left feeding those pigs. According to them that was because I was not reeducated enough, but Chen Qingyang said it was because someone kept me in mind.
This "someone" might have been the military deputy on our farm.
She also said the military deputy was a jerk.
She used to work in the hospital, but when the military deputy tried to grope her, she gave him a big slap, and afterward, she was sent down to the fifteenth production team to work as a team doctor.
The fifteenth team's water was bitter, and there wasn't much to eat either. She got used to it after a while.
But it was clear from the start the military deputy just wanted to make trouble for her.
Chen Qingyang said that the military deputy would definitely not go easy on me, perhaps I would be kept-in-mind half to death.
I said: What can he do to me?
If things get really bad, I can simply run the hell away.
What happened later all started there.
That morning, right at dawn, I went down the mountain to feed the pigs.
As I passed the village well, I saw the military deputy at the well stand brushing his teeth.
He took the brush out of his mouth and talked to me with a mouth full of froth. I thought he was very disgusting, so I left without a word.
Shortly afterward, he ran to the pigpen and shouted at me: How dare you walk away from me like that?
I kept silent as I heard the words.
Even when he accused me of playing dumb, I still said nothing.
After a while I walked away again.
The military deputy came to our team to do some grassroots investigation and then stayed.
According to him, he wouldn't give up until he made Wang Er talk.
His visit could be accounted for in two ways: one was that he came down to our team for the investigation, but when he met someone like me who played dumb with him, he got pissed off and decided to stay; the other was that he came down to our team not for investigation, but to pick on me, after hearing that Chen Qingyang and I had a love affair.
Whatever brought him to our team, I made up my mind to stay mute. He couldn't do anything about it.
The military deputy had a talk with me, asking me to write a confession.
He said that the masses were very angry about my love affair with Chen Qingyang. If I didn't confess, he would mobilize the masses to deal with me.
He also said my behavior met the criteria for my classification as one of "the bad elements," and I should be punished by the proletarian dictatorship.
I could have defended myself by saying I didn't have a love affair.
Who could prove I did?
But I just stared at him, like a wild boar, like an idiot, like a male cat staring at a female one, until his anger vanished under my stare. Then he let me go.
In the end, he still couldn't get anything out of me.
He wasn't even sure whether I was a mute or not.
People told him that I wasn't a mute. He couldn't be sure since he had never heard me speak a single word.
To this day, whenever he thinks of me, he still can't figure out if I am mute or not.
It makes me very happy whenever I think about it.
"Don't worry," Shi Qiang said to Wang, as he sat down next to him at the meeting table. "I'm not radioactive anymore. The last couple of days they've washed me inside and outside like a flour sack.
They didn't originally think you needed to attend this meeting, but I insisted. Heh. I bet the two of us are going to be important this time."
As Da Shi spoke, he picked a cigar butt out of the ashtray, lit it, and took a long drag. He nodded, and, in a slow, relaxed manner, blew the smoke into the faces of the attendees sitting on the other side of the table. One of the people sitting opposite him was the original owner of the cigar, Colonel Stanton of the U.S. Marine Corps. He gave Da Shi a contemptuous look.
Many more foreign military officers were at this meeting than the last. They were all in uniform.
For the first time in human history, the armed forces of the world's nations faced the same enemy.
General Chang said, "Comrades, everyone at this meeting now has the same basic understanding of the situation. Or, as Da Shi here would put it, we have information parity.
The war between alien invaders and humanity has begun. Our descendants won't face the Trisolarans for another four and a half centuries. For now, our opponents are still human. Yet, in essence, these traitors to the human race can also be seen as enemies from outside human civilization. We have never faced an enemy like this.
The next war objective is very clear: We must capture the intercepted Trisolaran messages stored on Judgment Day. These messages may have great significance for our survival.
"We haven't yet done anything to draw the suspicion of Judgment Day. The ship still sails the Atlantic freely. It has already submitted plans to the Panama Canal Authority to pass through the canal in four days.
This is a great opportunity for us. As the situation develops, such an opportunity may never arise again.
Right now, all the Battle Command Centers around the globe are drafting up operation plans, and Central will select one within ten hours and begin implementation.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss possible plans of operation, and then report one to three of our best suggestions to Central.
Time is of the essence, and we must work efficiently.
"Note that any plan must guarantee one thing: the secure capture of the Trisolaran messages.
Judgment Day was rebuilt from an old tanker, and both the superstructure and the interior have been extensively renovated with complex structures to contain many new rooms and passageways. Supposedly even the crew relies on a map when entering unfamiliar areas. We, of course, know even less about the ship's layout.
Right now, we cannot even be certain of the location of the computing center on Judgment Day, and we don't know whether the intercepted Trisolaran messages are stored in servers located in the computing center, or how many copies they have.
The only way to achieve our objective is to completely capture and control Judgment Day. "The most difficult part is preventing the enemy from erasing Trisolaran data during our attack.
Destroying the data would be very easy. The enemy would not use conventional methods to erase the data during an attack, because it's easy to recover the data using known technology. But if they just emptied a cartridge clip at the server hard drive or other storage media, it would all be over, and doing so would take no more than ten seconds.
So we must disable all enemies near the storage equipment within ten seconds of their detecting an attack.
Since we don't know the exact location of the data storage or the number of copies, we must eliminate all enemies on Judgment Day within a very brief period of time, before the target has been alerted. At the same time, we can't heavily damage the facilities within, especially computer equipment.
Thus, this is a very difficult task. Some think it's impossible."
A Japanese Self-Defense Forces officer said, "We believe that the only chance for success is to rely on spies on Judgment Day. If they're familiar with where the Trisolaran information is stored, they can control the area or move the storage equipment elsewhere right before our operation."
Someone asked, "Reconnaissance and monitoring of Judgment Day have always been the responsibility of NATO military intelligence and the CIA. Do we have such spies?"
"No," the NATO liaison said.
"Then we have nothing more to discuss except bullshit," said Da Shi. He was met with annoyed looks.
Colonel Stanton said, "Since the objective is eliminating all personnel within an enclosed structure without harming other equipment within, our first thought was to use a ball lightning weapon."
Ding Yi shook his head. "The existence of this kind of weapon is now public knowledge. We don't know if the ship has been equipped with magnetic walls to shield against ball lightning. Even if it hasn't, a ball lightning weapon can indeed kill all personnel within the ship, but it cannot do so simultaneously. Also, after the ball lightning enters the ship, it may hover in the air for some time before releasing its energy. This wait time can last from a dozen seconds to a minute or longer. They will have enough time to realize they've been attacked and destroy the data."
Colonel Stanton asked, "What about a neutron bomb?"
"Colonel, you should know that's not going to work."
The speaker was a Russian officer. "The radiation from a neutron bomb cannot kill right away. After a neutron bomb attack, the amount of time left to the enemy would be more than enough for them to have a meeting just like this one."
"Another thought was to use nerve gas," a NATO officer said. "But releasing it and having it spread throughout the ship would take time, so it still doesn't achieve General Chang's requirements."
"Then the only choices left are concussion bombs and infrasonic waves," Colonel Stanton said. Others waited for him to finish his thought, but he said nothing more.
Da Shi said, "I use concussion bombs in police work, but they're toys. They're indeed capable of stunning people inside a building into unconsciousness, but they're only good for a room or two.
Do you have any concussion bombs big enough to stun a whole oil tanker full of people?"
Stanton shook his head. "No. Even if we did, such a large explosive device would certainly damage equipment inside the ship."
"So what about infrasonic weapons?" someone asked.
"They're still experimental and cannot be used in live combat.
Also, the ship is very large. At the power level available to current experimental prototypes, the most that a full assault on Judgment Day could do is to make the people inside feel dizzy and nauseous."
"Ha!" Da Shi extinguished the cigar butt, now as tiny as a peanut. "I told you all we have left to discuss is bullshit. We've been at it for a while now. Let's remember what the general said: 'Time is of the essence!'"
He gave a sly grin to the translator, a female first lieutenant who looked unhappy with his language. "Not easy to translate, eh, comrade? Just get the approximate meaning across."
But Stanton seemed to understand what he was saying. He pointed at Shi Qiang with a fresh cigar that he had just taken out. "Who does this policeman think he is, that he can talk to us this way?"
"Who do you think you are?"
Da Shi asked.
"Colonel Stanton is an expert in special ops," a NATO officer said. "He has been a part of every major military operation since the Vietnam War."
"Then let me tell you who I am. More than thirty years ago, my reconnaissance squad managed to sneak dozens of kilometers behind Vietnamese lines and capture a hydroelectric station under heavy guard. We prevented the Vietnamese plan to demolish the dam with explosives, which would have flooded the attack route for our army.
That's who I am. I defeated an enemy who once defeated you."
"That's enough!"
General Chang slammed the table. "Don't bring up irrelevant matters. If you have a plan, say what it is."
"I don't think we need to waste time on this policeman,"
Colonel Stanton said contemptuously, as he lit his cigar.
Without waiting for a translation, Da Shi jumped up. "'Pao-Li-Si'—I heard that word twice. What? You look down on the police?
If you're talking about dropping some bombs and turning that ship into smithereens, yeah, you military are the experts. But if you're talking about retrieving something out of it without damage, I don't care how many stars are on your shoulder, you aren't even as good as a thief.
For this kind of thing, you have to think outside the box. OUT. OF. THE. BOX!
You will never be as good at it as criminals, masters of out-of-the-box thinking.
"You know how good they are?
I once handled a robbery where the criminals managed to steal one car out of a moving train. They reconnected the cars before and after the one they were interested in so that the train got all the way to its destination without anyone noticing. The only tools they used were a length of wire cable and a few steel hooks.
Those are the real special ops experts.
And someone like me, a criminal cop who has been playing cat and mouse with them for more than a decade, has received the best education and training from them."
"Tell us your plan, then," General Chang said. "Otherwise, shut up!"
"There are so many important people here that I didn't think it was my place to speak. And I was afraid that you, General, would say I was being rude again."
"You're already the definition of rudeness.
Enough!
Tell me what your out-of-the-box plan is."
Da Shi picked up a pen and drew two parallel curves on the table. "That's the canal."
He put the ashtray between the two lines. "This is Judgment Day."
Then he reached across the table and pulled Colonel Stanton's just-lit cigar out of his mouth.
"I can no longer tolerate this idiot!" the colonel shouted, standing up.
"Da Shi, get out of here!" General Chang said.
"Give me one minute. I'll be done soon."
Da Shi extended a hand in front of Colonel Stanton.
"What do you want?" the colonel asked, puzzled.
"Give me another one."
Stanton hesitated for a second before taking another cigar out of a beautiful wooden box and handing it to Da Shi. Da Shi took the smoking end of the first cigar and pressed it against the table so that it stood on the shore of the Panama Canal that he'd drawn on the table. He flattened the end of the other cigar and erected it on the other shore of the canal.
"We set up two pillars on the shores of the canal, and then between them we string many parallel, thin filaments, about half a meter apart. The filaments should be made from the nanomaterial called 'Flying Blade,' developed by Professor Wang.
After Shi Qiang finished speaking, he stood and waited a few seconds. Then he raised his hands, said to the stunned crowd, "That's it," turned, and left.
The air seemed frozen. Everyone present stayed still like stone statues. Even the droning from the computers all around them seemed more careful.
After a long while, someone timidly broke the silence, "Professor Wang, is 'Flying Blade' really in the form of filaments?"
Wang nodded. "Given our current molecular construction technique, the only form we can make is a filament. The thickness is about one-hundredth the thickness of human hair....
Officer Shi got this information from me before the meeting."
"Do you have enough material?"
"How wide is the canal?
And how tall is the ship?"
"The narrowest point of the canal is one hundred fifty meters wide. Judgment Day is thirty-one meters tall, with a draft of eight meters or so."
Wang stared at the cigars on the table and did some mental calculations. "I think I should have enough."
Another long silence. Everyone was trying to recover from their astonishment.
"What if the equipment storing Trisolaran data, such as hard drives and optical disks, is also sliced?"
"That doesn't seem likely."
"Even if they were sliced," a computer expert said, "it's not a big deal. The filaments are extremely sharp, and the cut surfaces would be very smooth. Given that premise, whether it's hard drives, optical disks, or integrated circuit storage, we could recover the vast majority of the data."
"Anyone got a better idea?"
Chang looked around the table. No one spoke. "All right. Then let's focus on this and work out the details."
Colonel Stanton, who had been silent the whole time, stood up. "I will go and ask Officer Shi to come back."
General Chang indicated that he should remain seated. Then he called out, "Da Shi!"
Da Shi returned, grinning at everyone. He picked up the cigars on the table. The one that had been lit he put into his mouth, and the other he stuffed into his pocket.
Someone asked, "When Judgment Day passes, can those two pillars bear the force applied against the Flying Blade filaments?
Maybe the pillars would be sliced apart first."
Wang said, "That's easy to solve. We have some small amounts of Flying Blade material that are flat sheets. We can use them to protect the parts of the column where the filaments are attached."
The discussion after that was mainly between the naval officers and navigation experts.
"Judgment Day is at the upper limit in terms of tonnage that can pass through the Panama Canal. It has a deep draft, so we have to consider installing filaments below the waterline."
"That will be very difficult. If there's not enough time, I don't think we should worry about it. The parts of the ship below the waterline are used for engines, fuel, and ballast, causing a lot of noise, vibration, and interference. The conditions are too poor for computing centers and other similar facilities to be located there.
But for the parts above water, a tighter nanofilament net will give better results."
"Then it's best to set the trap at one of the locks along the canal. Judgment Day is built to Panamax specifications, just enough to fill the thirty-two-meter locks. Then we would only need to make the Flying Blade filaments thirty-two meters long. This will also make it easier to erect the pillars and string the filaments between them, especially for the underwater parts."
"No. The situation around the locks is too unpredictable. Also, a ship inside the lock must be pulled forward by four 'mules,' electric locomotives on rails. They move slowly, and the time inside the locks will also be when the crew is most alert. An attempt to slice through the ship during that time would most likely be discovered."
"What about the Bridge of the Americas, right outside the Miraflores Locks?
The abutments at the two ends of the bridge can serve as the pillars for stringing the filaments."
"No. The distance between the abutments is too great. We don't have enough Flying Blade material."
"Then it's decided: The site of operation should be the narrowest point of the Gaillard Cut, a hundred and fifty meters across. Add in some slack for the pillars ... let's call it a hundred seventy meters."
Wang said, "If that's the plan, then the smallest distance between the filaments will be fifty centimeters. I don't have enough material for a tighter net."
"In other words, we have to make sure the ship crosses during the day," Da Shi said, blowing out another mouthful of smoke.
"Why?"
"At night the crew will be sleeping, which means they'll all be lying down. Fifty centimeters between filaments leaves too much of a gap. But during the day, even if they're sitting or crouching, the distance is sufficient."
A few scattered laughs. The attendees, all under heavy stress, felt a bit of release tinged with the smell of blood.
"You're truly a demon," a female UN official said to Da Shi.
"Will innocent bystanders be hurt?"
Wang asked, his voice trembling.
A naval officer replied, "When the ship goes through the locks, more than a dozen cable workers will come onboard, but they'll all get off after the ship passes.
The Panama Canal pilot will have to accompany the ship the entire eighty-two kilometers, so the pilot will have to be sacrificed."
A CIA officer said, "And some of the crew aboard Judgment Day probably don't know the real purpose of the ship."
"Professor," General Chang said, "do not concern yourself with these thoughts.
The information we need to obtain has to do with the very survival of human civilization. Someone else will make the call."
As the meeting ended, Colonel Stanton pushed the beautiful cigar box in front of Shi Qiang. "Captain, the best Havana has to offer. They're yours."
Four days later, Gaillard Cut, Panama Canal
Wang could not even tell that he was in a foreign country.
He knew that to the west, not too far away, was beautiful Gatun Lake. To the east was the magnificent Bridge of the Americas and Panama City. But he had had no chance to see either of them. Two days earlier, he had arrived by direct flight from China to Tocumen International Airport near Panama City and then rode a helicopter here.
The sight before him was very common: The construction work under way to widen the canal caused the tropical forest on both slopes to be quite sparse, revealing large patches of yellow earth. The color felt familiar to Wang.
The canal didn't seem very special, probably because it was so narrow here, but a hundred thousand people had dug out this part of the canal in the previous century, one hoe at a time.
Wang and Colonel Stanton sat on lounge chairs under an awning halfway up the slope. Both wore loose, colorful shirts, with their Panama hats tossed to the side, looking like two tourists.
Below, on each shore of the canal, a twenty-four-meter steel pillar lay flat against the ground, parallel to the shore. Fifty ultrastrong nanofilaments, each 160 meters long, were strung between the pillars. At the end on the eastern shore, every filament was connected to a length of regular steel wire. This was to give the filaments enough slack so that they could sink to the bottom of the canal, aided by attached weights. The setup permitted other ships safe passage.
Luckily, traffic along the canal wasn't quite as busy as Wang had imagined. On average, only about forty large ships passed through each day.
The operation's code name was "Guzheng," based on the similarity between the structure and the ancient Chinese zither by that name. The slicing net of nanofilaments was thus called the "zither."
An hour earlier, Judgment Day had entered the Gaillard Cut from Gatun Lake.
Stanton asked Wang whether he had ever been to Panama before. Wang said no.
"I came here in 1989," the colonel said.
"Because of that war?"
"Yes, that was one of those wars that left me with no impression. I only remember being in front of the Vatican embassy as 'Nowhere to Run' by Martha and the Vandellas played for the holed-up Noriega. That was my idea, by the way."
In the canal below them, a pure white French cruise ship slowly sailed past. Several passengers in colorful clothing strolled leisurely on the green-carpeted deck.
"Second Observation Post reporting: There are no more ships in front of the target."
Stanton's walkie-talkie squawked.
Stanton gave the order. "Raise the zither."
Several men wearing hard hats appeared on both shores, looking like maintenance workers.
Wang stood up, but the colonel pulled him down. "Professor, don't worry. They know what to do."
Wang watched as those on the eastern shore rapidly winched back the steel wires attached to the nanofilaments and secured the tightened nanofilaments to the pillar.
Then, slowly, the two pillars were stood upright using their mechanical hinges.
As a disguise, the pillars were decorated with some navigational markings and water depth indicators.
The workers proceeded leisurely, as though they were simply carrying out their boring jobs.
Wang gazed at the space between the pillars. There seemed to be nothing there, but the deadly zither was already in place.
"Target is four kilometers from the zither," the voice in the walkie-talkie said.
Stanton put the walkie-talkie down. He continued the conversation with Wang. "The second time I came to Panama was in 1999, to attend the ceremony for the handover of the canal to Panama. Oddly, by the time we got to the Authority's building, the Stars and Stripes were already gone. Supposedly the U.S. government had requested that the flag be lowered a day early to avoid the embarrassment of lowering the flag in front of a crowd....
Back then, I thought I was witnessing history. But now that seems so insignificant."
"Target is three kilometers from the zither."
"Yes, insignificant," Wang mumbled.
He wasn't listening to Stanton at all. The rest of the world had ceased to exist for him. All of his attention was focused on the spot where Judgment Day would appear.
By now the sun that had risen over the Atlantic was falling toward the Pacific. The canal sparkled with golden light. Close by, the deadly zither stood quietly. The two steel pillars were dark and reflected no sunlight, looking even older than the canal that flowed between them.
"Target is two kilometers from the zither."
Stanton seemed to not have heard the voice from the walkie-talkie. He continued, "After learning that the alien fleet is coming toward the Earth, I've been suffering from amnesia.
It's so strange. I can't recall many things from the past. I don't remember the details of the wars I experienced. Like I just said, those wars all seem so insignificant.
After learning this truth, everyone becomes a new person spiritually, and sees the world anew.
I've been thinking: Suppose two thousand years ago, or even earlier, humanity learned that an alien invasion fleet would arrive a few thousand years later. What would human civilization be like now?
Professor, can you imagine it?"
"Ah, no..."
Wang answered perfunctorily, his mind elsewhere.
"Target is one point five kilometers from the zither."
"Professor, I think you will be the Gaillard of this new era. We're waiting for your new Panama Canal to be built.
Indeed, the space elevator is a canal. Just as the Panama Canal connected two oceans, the space elevator will connect space with the Earth."
Wang knew that the colonel's babbling was meant to help him through this very difficult time.
He was grateful, but it wasn't working.
"Target is one kilometer from the zither."
Judgment Day appeared. In the light from the setting sun coming over the hills to the side, it was a dark silhouette against the golden waves of the canal.
The sixty-thousand-ton ship was much larger than Wang had imagined. Its appearance was like another peak abruptly inserted among the hills. Even though Wang knew that the canal was capable of accommodating ships as large as seventy thousand tons, witnessing such a large ship in such a narrow waterway was a strange feeling.
Given its immensity, the canal below seemed to no longer exist. The ship was a mountain gliding across solid earth.
After he grew used to the sunlight, Wang saw that Judgment Day's hull was pitch black, and the superstructure was painted pure white. The giant antenna was gone.
They heard the roar from the ship's engines, accompanied by the churning sound of waves that had been generated by the round prow slapping against the shores of the canal.
As the distance between Judgment Day and the deadly zither closed, Wang's heart began to beat faster, and his breath became short. He had a desire to run away, but he felt so weak that he could no longer control his body.
All at once, he was overwhelmed by a deep hatred for Shi Qiang. How could the bastard have come up with such an idea?
Like that UN official said, he is a demon!
But the feeling passed. He thought that if Da Shi were by his side, he would probably feel better.
Colonel Stanton had invited Shi Qiang to come, but General Chang refused to give permission because he said that Da Shi was needed where he was.
Wang felt the colonel's hand on his back.
"Professor, all this will pass."
Judgment Day was below them now, passing through the deadly zither.
When its prow first contacted the plane between the two steel pillars, the space that seemed empty, Wang's scalp tightened. But nothing happened. The immense hull of the ship continued to slowly sail past the two steel pillars.
When half the ship had passed, Wang began to doubt whether the nanofilaments between the steel pillars really existed.
But a small sign soon negated his doubt. He noticed a thin antenna located at the very top of the superstructure breaking at its base, and the antenna tumbling down.
Soon, there was a second sign indicating the presence of the nanofilaments, a sign that almost made Wang break down.
Judgment Day's wide deck was empty save for one man standing near the stern hosing down the ship's bollards. From his vantage point, Wang saw everything clearly. The moment that that section of the ship passed between the pillars, the hose broke into two pieces not too far from the man, and water spilled out. The man's body stiffened, and the nozzle tumbled from his hand. He remained standing for a few seconds, then fell. As his body contacted the deck, it came apart in two halves.
The top half crawled through the expanding pool of blood, but had to use two arms that were bloody stumps. The hands had been cleanly sliced off.
After the stern of the ship went between the two pillars, Judgment Day continued to sail forward at the same speed, and everything seemed normal.
But then Wang heard the sound of the engine shift into a strange whine, before turning into chaotic noise. It sounded like a wrench being thrown into the rotor of a large motor—no, many, many wrenches. He knew this was the result of the rotating parts of the engine having been cut.
After a piercing, tearing sound, a hole appeared in the side of the stern of Judgment Day, made by a large metallic piece punching through the hull.
A broken component flew out of the hole and fell into the water, causing a large column of water to shoot up. As it briefly flew past, Wang recognized it as a section of the engine crankshaft.
A thick column of smoke poured out of the hole. Judgment Day, which had been sailing along the right shore, now began to turn, dragging this smoky tail. Soon it crossed over the canal and smashed into the left shore.
As Wang looked, the giant prow deformed as it collided into the slope, slicing open the hill like water, causing waves of earth to spill in all directions.
At the same time, Judgment Day began to separate into more than forty slices, each slice half a meter thick. The slices near the top moved faster than the slices near the bottom, and the ship spread open like a deck of cards. As the forty-some metal slices moved past each other, the piercing noise was like countless giant fingernails scratching against glass.
By the time the intolerable noise ended, Judgment Day was spilled on the shore like a stack of plates carried by a stumbling waiter, the plates near the top having traveled the farthest.
The slices looked as soft as cloth, and rapidly deformed into complicated shapes impossible to imagine as having once belonged to a ship.
Soldiers rushed toward the shore from the slope. Wang was surprised to find so many men hidden nearby.
A fleet of helicopters arrived along the canal with their engines roaring; crossed the canal surface, which was now covered by an iridescent oil slick; hovered over the wreckage of Judgment Day; and began to drop large quantities of fire suppression foam and powder. Shortly, the fire in the wreckage was under control, and three other helicopters began to drop searchers into the wreckage with cables.
Colonel Stanton had already left. Wang picked up the binoculars he'd left on top of his hat. Overcoming his trembling hands, he observed Judgment Day.
By this time, the wreckage was mostly covered by fire-extinguishing foam and powder, but the edges of some of the slices were left exposed.
Wang saw the cut surfaces, smooth as mirrors. They reflected the fiery red light of dusk perfectly.
He also saw a deep red spot on the mirror surface. He wasn't sure if it was blood.
Three days later
INTERROGATOR: Do you understand Trisolaran civilization?
YE WENJIE: No. We received only very limited information. No one has real, detailed knowledge of Trisolaran civilization except Mike Evans and other core members of the Adventists who intercepted their messages.
INTERROGATOR: Then why do you have such hope for it, thinking that it can reform and perfect human society?
YE: If they can cross the distance between the stars to come to our world, their science must have developed to a very advanced stage. A society with such advanced science must also have more advanced moral standards.
INTERROGATOR: Do you think this conclusion you drew is scientific?
YE: ...
INTERROGATOR: Let me presume to guess: Your father was deeply influenced by your grandfather's belief that only science could save China. And you were deeply influenced by your father.
YE: (sighing quietly) I don't know.
INTERROGATOR: We have already obtained all the Trisolaran messages intercepted by the Adventists.
YE: Oh ... what happened to Evans?
INTERROGATOR: He died during the operation to capture Judgment Day.
But the posture of his body pointed us to the computers holding copies of the Trisolaran messages. Thankfully, they were all encoded with the same self-interpreting code used by Red Coast.
YE: Was there a lot of data?
INTERROGATOR: Yes, about twenty-eight gigabytes.
YE: That's impossible. Interstellar communication is very inefficient. How can so much data have been transmitted?
INTERROGATOR: We thought so at first, too. But things were not at all as we had imagined—not even in our boldest, most fantastic imaginations.
How about this? Please read this section of the preliminary analysis of the captured data, and you can see the reality of the Trisolaran civilization, compared with your beautiful fantasies.
Finally we were taken into custody and forced to write confessions for a long time.
At first I wrote the following: Chen Qingyang and I have an indecent relationship.
That was all.
But it came down from above that what I wrote was too simple, and they asked me to start over.
Later on I wrote that Chen Qingyang and I had an indecent relationship, and that I had screwed her many times, and she liked being screwed by me.
This time the opinions from above said it needed more detail.
So I added detail: The fortieth time that we made illegal love, the location was the thatched hut I secretly built on the mountain.
It was either the fifteenth or the sixteenth by the lunar calendar—whatever the date, the moon shone brightly.
Chen Qingyang sat on the bamboo bed, her body gleaming in the moonlight that shone through the door.
I stood on the ground, and she locked her legs around my waist.
We chatted for a while. I told her that her breasts were not just full, but also shapely; her navel not only round, but shallow too.
All of this was very good.
She said, Really? I had no idea.
After a while the moonlight moved away. I lit a cigarette, but she took it from me after I finished half of it, taking several drags.
She pinched my nose, for the locals believed that a virgin's nose would be very hard, and a man dying of too much sex would have a soft nose.
On some of these occasions she lazed on the bed, leaning against the bamboo wall; other times she held me like a koala bear, blowing warm breath on my face.
At last the moonlight shone through the window opposite the door and we were separate by then.
However, I wrote these confessions not for the military deputy — he was no longer our military deputy, having been discharged from the army and gone back home.
It didn't matter whether he was our military deputy or not, we had to write confessions about our errors anyway.
Years later, I had a good relationship with the director of personnel at our school.
He told me that the great thing about the job was that you could read other people's confessions, which I believe included mine.
I thought of all the confessions mine would be the richest and most vivid.
That was because I wrote it in a hotel, with nothing else to do, like a professional writer.
In the evening I made my escape.
That morning, I asked the mess officer for a day off because I needed to go to Jingkan to buy toothpaste.
I worked under the mess officer, who also had the task of watching me.
He was supposed to keep an eye on me every minute, but I disappeared as soon as it got dark.
In the morning I brought him a lot of loquats, all very good.
The loquats growing on the plain aren't edible, because of the ant colonies in them.
Only the ones on the mountain don't have ants.
The mess officer said since we got along, and the military deputy wasn't around, he'd allow me to go buy toothpaste.
But he also said the military deputy might return any minute.
If I were not here by the time the military deputy returned, he couldn't cover for me.
I left my team and climbed to the fifteenth team's mountainside, holding a small piece of mirror to reflect light on Chen Qingyang's back window.
After a while, she came up the mountain and told me that since people had been keeping a close eye on her for the past two days, she hadn't been able to get out.
And right now she was having her period.
She said that shouldn't be a problem and we could still do it.
I said that wasn't going to work.
When we said goodbye to each other, she insisted on giving me two hundred yuan.
I refused at first, but then took it after a while.
Later Chen Qingyang told me that nobody had been keeping a close eye on her those two days, and she hadn't been having her period when she saw me.
In fact, people in the fifteenth team didn't pay attention to her at all.
People there were used to accusing the innocent of being damaged goods, but as for real damaged goods, they just let them do whatever they wanted.
The reason that she didn't come up the mountain and kept me waiting for nothing was because she began to feel tired of it.
She couldn't do it unless she was in the right mood; having sex wouldn't necessarily put her in a good mood.
Of course, after her deception she felt guilty.
That was why she gave me two hundred yuan.
I thought since she might have trouble spending the two hundred yuan, I wouldn't mind helping her.
So I brought the money with me to Jingkan and bought a double-barreled shotgun for myself.
Later when I wrote my confessions, the double-barreled shotgun was also an issue.
They suspected that I might want to kill someone with it.
Actually, if I'd wanted to kill someone, it wouldn't have made any difference whether I used a two hundred-yuan double-barreled shotgun or a forty-yuan bronze-barreled gun.
A bronze-barreled gun, normally used to shoot wild ducks by the water, was not practical at all in the mountains; besides, it was as heavy as a corpse.
When I got to the street in Jingkan that day, it was already afternoon, and since it wasn't a market day, there was just a deserted dirt road and a few deserted state-run stores.
Inside one store a saleswoman dozed while a swarm of flies circled around.
The shelf display read "aloomenum wokk" and "aloomenum kittel," and underneath were aluminum woks and aluminum kettles.
I chatted awhile with the saleswoman, who was from Shandong Province, and she let me go in their storeroom to look around myself.
In there I saw a shotgun made in Shanghai. So I bought it even though it had sat there for nearly two years.
At dusk I tested it on the riverbank and killed a heron.
The military deputy happened to return from the farm headquarters right then and was shocked to see my shotgun.
He went on about how it was not right that everyone could have a gun, and that someone had to talk to the team leader and confiscate Wang Er's gun.
When I heard this, I felt the urge to fire at his belly.
If I had, it would probably have killed him.
Then most likely I wouldn't be around today.
On the way back from Jingkan that afternoon, I waded through the paddy field and stood among the rice seedlings for a while.
I saw leeches swimming out like fish and sticking to my legs.
I was naked to the waist then, because I had used my clothes to wrap brown sugar buns (the only kind of food sold in the town's restaurant), and with the buns in my hands and a gun slung over my back, I felt really loaded down.
So I ignored the leeches.
Only when I got up the bank did I start pulling them off one by one and burning them.
They turned soft and blistery in the fire.
All of a sudden, I felt very frustrated and tired, nothing like a twenty-one-year-old.
I realized I would get old quickly if things continued like this.
After a while, I ran into Le Du, who told me that they had caught all the fish at the fork of the rivers.
My share had been dried into stockfish and stored at his sister's place.
His sister wanted me to come get it.
I knew his sister very well; she was a dark, pretty girl.
I told him that I couldn't get there for a while.
I gave him all my brown sugar buns and asked him to take a message to the fifteenth team, telling Chen Qingyang that I'd bought a gun with her money.
Le Du went to the fifteenth team and told Chen Qingyang. She was afraid that I might shoot the military deputy.
This concern was not completely unreasonable. By the evening I really began to consider taking a shot at the military deputy.
At dusk, when I shot the heron by the river, I ran into the military deputy.
As usual, I stayed mute and he kept nagging at me.
I got really angry. For more than two weeks, he had been holding forth on the same subject over and over, that I was a bad person and needed thought reform.
People shouldn't let up on me for a minute.
I'd been hearing that sort of thing all my life but never got angrier than that night.
After a while, he said he had wonderful good news to announce later that day, but wouldn't reveal what it was except that "the rotten whore" Chen Qingyang and I were going to have a really hard time from now on.
Infuriated by what he said, I was tempted to choke him right on the spot, but my curiosity about the great news got the better of me.
However, he went on talking nonsense to keep me guessing. Not until we reached our team did he say, Come to the meeting tonight. I'll announce the news at the meeting.
But I didn't go to the meeting that evening. I packed my stuff, ready to flee back to the mountains.
I believed that some major event must have happened to give the military deputy a way to take care of Chen Qingyang and me. As for what the event was, I couldn't figure it out—in those days anything could happen.
I even imagined that the emperor had been restored and the military deputy had become the local chief.
He could castrate me with a hammer and then take Chen Qingyang as his concubine.
By the time I finished my packing and was about to leave, I realized that things were not that bad.
People were shouting slogans at the meeting that I could hear even from my room.
It turned out that our state-run farm had been changed into an Army Production Corps, and the military deputy might be promoted to Regimental Commander.
At any rate, he couldn't castrate me, or take Chen Qingyang as his concubine.
After a few minutes' hesitation, I slung the pack on my back. Then I hacked up everything in the place with a machete, found a piece of charcoal, and wrote "xxx (the military deputy's name), fuck your mother!" on the wall.
After that I left and headed up the mountain.
That was how I ran away from the fourteenth team.
I also included these things in my confessions.
To summarize, it went like this: The military deputy had a personal grudge against me, which was twofold.
Firstly, I told the relief delegation that I had been beaten unconscious, which made the military deputy lose face; secondly, he and I fought over a woman, which was why he was always trying to screw me.
So, when I learned he was about to become Regimental Commander, I felt that I couldn't take it anymore and fled into the mountains.
Even today I still believe that was the true reason for my escape.
But they said that the military deputy hadn't become Regimental Commander, so my explanation for running away wouldn't stand up.
So, they said my confessions were unconvincing.
A convincing confession would be that Chen Qingyang and I were having a love affair.
As the saying goes: For sex, a man would dare anything. We would do anything for it — well, there's some truth to that. But when I ran away from our team, I didn't plan to see Chen Qingyang, thinking that I could just leave without telling anyone.
When I reached the edge of the mountains I realized that after all Chen Qingyang was a friend of mine and I should go back to say goodbye to her.
I hadn't expected Chen Qingyang to say she wanted to run away with me.
She said if she didn't join me in such an adventure, we would throw our great friendship to the dogs.
So she packed some stuff in a hurry and took off with me.
Without her and what she packed, I would have gotten sick and died on the mountain for sure.
The supplies she packed included lots of malaria medicine, and plenty of jumbo-sized condoms.
After Chen Qingyang and I escaped to the mountains, the farm panicked for a while.
They believed we had run off to Burma.
It wouldn't have been good for any of us if that news had gotten out. So they didn't report us, only issued a wanted poster on the farm.
Both Chen Qingyang and I were easily recognized, and, besides, the double-barreled shotgun we brought along was hard to hide. But for some reason nobody found us until half a year later when each of us returned to our own teams. And then after another month, the public security section summoned us to write our confessions.
It was our bad luck to be the victims of a new political campaign and have someone inform on us.
The office of public security was located at the entrance to our farm's headquarters. It was a lonely mud-brick house.
You could see it from far off, because it was whitewashed and set on a hill.
When people went to the market at headquarters, they could see it from a distance.
A patch of sisal hemp, a perennial dark green in color, surrounded the house, but the clay underneath was red.
I confessed my errors there, making a clean breast of everything.
We went up the mountains, and first we planted some corn on the back slope of the fifteenth team. The soil there was poor, and half the corn didn't grow.
And then we left, sleeping in the daytime and walking at night, looking for other places to settle.
Finally we remembered an abandoned mill on the mountain, where there was a large, deserted area of fertile ground.
Since an escapee from the leper colony, whom people called Grandpa Liu, lived there, no one visited except Chen Qingyang, prompted by her sense of duty as a doctor.
We finally went there for shelter, living in the valley behind the mill. Chen Qingyang treated Grandpa Liu's leprosy, and I tended the land for him.
After a while, I traveled to the market in Qingping and ran into some classmates.
They told me that the military deputy had been transferred someplace else and nobody remembered our affair anymore.
So we came back.
That was how the whole business went.
I remained in the public security section for a long time.
For a while the atmosphere was not bad. They said my problem was pretty clear and all I needed to do was to write confessions.
But after a while the situation turned more serious; they suspected that we had gone abroad, colluded with the enemy, and come back on a mission.
So they took Chen Qingyang to the office, interrogating her severely.
While they interrogated her, I looked out the window—the sky was filled with clouds.
They wanted me to confess how I had slipped across the border.
As far as border-crossing went, I wasn't completely innocent.
I did cross the border.
I disguised myself as a Thai to go to the market on the other side.
I bought a few boxes of matches and salt.
But it was unnecessary to tell them about this.
Things unnecessary to say shouldn't be said.
Later I led those security people to our place to investigate.
The thatched hut that I built on the back slope of the fifteenth team had leaks in the roof, the cornfield attracted many birds, and the heap of used condoms behind our hut supplied ironclad evidence of our former occupancy.
The locals didn't like to use condoms, holding that condoms block exchange between yin and yang and gradually weaken people.
Actually, those local condoms were better than any other ones I used later.
They were made of 100 percent natural rubber.
Afterward I refused to take them there again. Anyway, I told them I had never crossed the border, and they didn't believe me;
I showed them the place, but they still didn't believe me.
Things unnecessary to do shouldn't be done.
I stayed mute all day long, and so did Chen Qingyang.
The investigators asked us questions at first, but got lazy after a while.
On market day, many Thais and Jingpos came by, carrying fresh fruits and vegetables on their backs, and our interrogators got fewer and fewer.
Finally there was only one person left.
He also wanted to go to the market, but it wasn't time to release us yet and leaving us unattended was against the rules.
So he went outside to call someone. He ordered a few passing women to stop.
They didn't stop but sped up.
We smiled when we saw this.
The security comrade finally stopped a woman.
Chen Qingyang rose to her feet, smoothed out her hair, straightened the collar of her shirt, and then turned around, putting her hands behind her back.
The woman tied her up, starting from her hands and then running the rope over her neck and arms to make a knot.
She apologized, I'm just hopeless at tying people up.
The security comrade said, That's good enough.
Then he tied me up, sat us back-to-back in two separate chairs, and roped the whole thing together. He locked the door and went to the market.
After a long time, he came back to get something from the office desk. He asked, Want to go to the bathroom?
It's still early. I'll come back after a while and then let you two leave.
Then he went out again.
When he finally came to set us free, Chen Qingyang wiggled her fingers, smoothed her hair, and brushed the dust from her clothes. Then we returned to our hotel room.
We went to the public security section every day and would be tied up every market day. Beyond that, we had to go to every team to accept public denouncement with other bad elements.
They threatened, more than once, to use other methods of the proletarian dictatorship on us—that was how our investigation went.
Later on they stopped suspecting we had gone abroad. They began to deal with Chen Qingyang in a more civilized way, often asking her to go to the hospital and treat the prostatitis of the chief of staff.
At that time, our farm had admitted a large number of retired army cadres, many of whom suffered from prostatitis.
Through the investigation, they found that Chen Qingyang was the only one on our entire farm who knew there was such a thing as a prostate gland in a human.
The security comrades told us to confess our love affair.
I said, How do you know we had a love affair?
Did you see it?
They said, Then confess your speculation problem.
Again I asked, How do you know I had a speculation problem?
They said, A traitorship problem would do.
Anyway, you have to confess something. As far as what specific problem you want to confess, that's up to you.
If you confess nothing, we won't release you.
After discussing it, Chen Qingyang and I decided to confess our love affair.
She said, Things we actually did we shouldn't be afraid to confess.
That was how I got started writing confessions like a writer.
The first thing I confessed was what happened the night we ran away.
After a few drafts, I finally wrote that Chen Qingyang looked like a koala bear.
She admitted that she was very excited that night and really felt like a koala bear.
She finally had a chance to fulfill her great friendship.
So she locked her legs around my waist, grabbed my shoulder with her hands, and imagining that I was a tall tree, tried to climb up several times.
When I saw Chen Qingyang again, it was already the nineties.
She told me that she had divorced her husband and was now living with her daughter in Shanghai. She came to Beijing on a business trip.
As soon as she got to Beijing, she began to recall that Wang Er lived here and she might be able to see me.
Subsequently, she did run into me at Dragon-Lair Lake Temple Fair.
I had the same old look—deep wrinkles stretching toward my mouth, dark circles under my eyes, and I wore an old-fashioned cotton jacket. Squatting on the ground, I was eating spiced giblets and baked pancakes that fancy places wouldn't serve.
The only difference was that my fingers had been burned yellow by nitric acid.
Chen Qingyang had changed a lot. She wore a thin beige coat, a tweed skirt, high-heeled leather boots and a pair of goldrimmed glasses, like a public relations person in a big company. If she hadn't called my name, I wouldn't have recognized her.
At that moment it dawned on me that everyone had his own essence, which would shine in the right setting.
I was essentially a rascal or bandit. Now that I was a city dweller and a schoolteacher, mine didn't look quite right.
Chen Qingyang said her daughter had gone into her sophomore year at the university. Recently she found out about our affair and wanted to meet me.
What occasioned this was: Her hospital wanted to promote Chen Qingyang, but they found this pile of confessions in her dossier.
After a discussion, the leaders decided they were persecutory materials from the Cultural Revolution and should be discarded.
So they sent someone to Yunnan to investigate her case, spent over ten thousand yuan on the trip, and finally removed all the confessions from the file.
Since she was the author, they returned them to her.
She brought them home and stashed them somewhere, and her daughter found them.
Her daughter said, Wow! So that's how the two of you made me.
Actually, I had nothing to do with her daughter.
When her daughter was conceived, I had already left Yunnan.
Chen Qingyang explained things to her daughter that way, too. But the girl said I could have put my sperm in a test tube and mailed it to Chen Qingyang, who was still in Yunnan at that time, for artificial insemination.
In her words, "There's nothing you pair of jerks wouldn't do."
The first night we escaped to the mountains, Chen Qingyang was very aroused.
When I finally got to sleep at daybreak, she woke me again. At that time fog was pouring through the crack in the wall.
She wanted me to do it again, telling me not to wear the rubber thing.
She was going to have a brood of babies with me. Let them hang down to here in a few years.
Meanwhile, she pulled her breasts down by the nipples to show me where they would reach.
But I didn't like the idea that her breasts would droop and said, Let's think of a way to keep them from drooping.
That was why I continued to wear the rubber thing.
After that she lost interest in making love to me.
When I saw Chen Qingyang all those years later, I asked, How are they? Did they droop?
She said, You bet they did. They're as droopy as hell.
Want to see the droop?
I got to see them shortly after—they weren't that bad.
But she said, They will be that bad sooner or later. There's no way out.
When I turned in this confession, the leaders really liked it.
One big shot, either the chief of staff or the commissar, received us and praised our attitudes.
They believed that we hadn't thrown ourselves into the enemy's embrace and betrayed our country, and our task in the future was to confess our illicit love affair.
If we confessed well, they would allow us to get married.
But we didn't want to get married.
So later they said if we confessed well, they would let me go back to civilization, and Chen Qingyang would get to work in a bigger hospital.
So I stayed in my hotel room and wrote confessions for over a month. Nothing interrupted me except the government business that I had to perform. I used carbon copies; the originals I kept, the duplicates I gave to her.
We used exactly the same confessions.
After a while, the security comrades came to talk to me, telling me about the big denouncement meeting they were going to hold.
All the people who had been investigated by the public security section would have to attend, including speculators, grafters, and all kinds of bad elements.
We belonged in the group, but the regimental leaders said that since we were young people, and had good attitudes, we didn't have to go.
But people compared their situation with ours, and asked, if everyone who'd been investigated had to be there, why were we being let off?
The security comrades were in a fix.
So we would have to take part in the meeting.
Finally they decided to work on mobilizing us to take part.
They told us that public denouncing had an impact on a person's mind, which could prevent us from committing errors in the future.
Since there was such an advantage, how could we miss the opportunity?
When the meeting day came, several thousand people flooded in from the farm headquarters and the nearby production teams.
We stood on the stage with many others.
After waiting a long time and hearing quite a few articles of denouncement read, our turn, convicts Wang and Chen, finally came.
It turned out that we were loose in morals and corrupted in lifestyle, and what was more, in order to evade thought reform, we had fled into the mountains.
Only under the influence of our party's policy did we come down the mountain to abandon darkness for sunlight.
Hearing comments like this, our emotions were stirred up, too. So we raised our arms and shouted out the slogans: Down with Wang Er!
Down with Chen Qingyang!
After this round of public denouncement, we thought we were done with it.
But we still had to write confessions because the leaders wanted to read them.
On the back slope of the fifteenth team, Chen Qingyang, seized with an impulse once, said she was going to bear a litter of young for me, but I wasn't interested.
Later I thought having babies wasn't a bad idea. But when I mentioned it to her, she changed her mind.
And she always thought that it was me who wanted to have sex.
She said, If you feel like it, just do it. I don't care.
I thought it would be too selfish if it were only for me. So I rarely asked for it.
Besides, cultivating the wilderness was very tiring and I didn't have the energy for it.
What I could confess was that I fondled her breasts when we rested at the edge of the field.
When we cultivated the wilderness in the dry season, hot air was all around. We didn't sweat at all, but our muscles felt dry and painful.
On the hottest days, we could only sleep under a tree, with heads pillowed on bamboo stalks and bodies lying on palmbark rain capes.
I wondered why nobody asked me to confess about the palm-bark rain cape, one of the labor-protection supplies for our farm, and very expensive.
I brought two along; one was mine, the other one I picked up conveniently from someone's doorway.
I returned neither of them to the farm.
Even when I left Yunnan, no one asked me to return the palm-bark rain capes.
During our break at the edge of the field, Chen Qingyang covered her face with a bamboo hat, opened her shirt collar, and immediately fell asleep.
I reached in, feeling the beautiful curves.
After a while, I unbuttoned a few more buttons, seeing that her skin was pink.
Even though she always worked with her clothes on, the sunshine still got through the thin fabric.
As for me, working bare to the waist, I had turned as black as a devil.
Chen Qingyang's breasts were two firm scoops, even when she lay back.
But the other parts of her body were very slender.
She hadn't changed much in twenty years, except that her nipples had grown a little bit bigger and darker.
She said the culprit was her daughter.
When the child was a newborn, she looked like a pink baby pig. With eyes closed, she swooped down on her mother's nipples sucking with all her might, until her mother became an old woman and she a beautiful young woman, a young version of her mother.
An older woman now, Chen Qingyang had become more sensitive.
When we relived our old days in the hotel, she seemed nervous about such subjects.
She hadn't been that way before.
Back when I hesitated to mention her breasts in the confessions, she said, Just write it down.
I said, You'd be exposed then.
She said, Let me be exposed. I don't care.
She also said her breasts were made this way. It wasn't like she had done something to fake them.
As for what other people thought when they heard about them, it wasn't her problem.
After all those years, I just discovered that Chen Qingyang was actually my ex-wife.
After we finished our confessions, they wanted us to get married.
I thought it was unnecessary.
But the leaders said that not getting married would have a very bad influence and insisted that we register.
So we registered to get married in the morning and divorced in the afternoon.
I thought it hadn't counted.
In the confusion they forgot to take our marriage certificate back, and so Chen Qingyang kept one for herself.
We used this shabby certificate issued to us twenty years ago to get a double room.
Without this, we wouldn't be allowed to stay in the same room.
It was different twenty years ago.
Twenty years ago they let us stay in the same hotel room to write our confessions, and back then we didn't even have the marriage certificate.
I wrote about what we had done on the back slope.
But the regional leaders asked the security comrades to pass on a message to me, saying that I could skip over the irrelevant details. Just move on to the next case.
Hearing this, I lost my stubborn-as-amule temper: The motherfuckers! Is this a case?
Chen Qingyang tried to help me understand: How many people are there in the world? How many times do people do it every day? And how many of them are important enough to be called cases?
I said actually they were all cases. It was just that the leaders couldn't check on them all.
She said, Well then, just confess.
So I confessed: That night, we left the back slope and returned to the scene of the crime.
Later I saw Chen Qingyang again. We registered for a room at a hotel, went in together, and then I helped her take off her coat.
Chen Qingyang said, Wang Er has become civilized.
It meant I had changed a lot.
In the old days, I did not just look ferocious, but also acted ferociously.
Chen Qingyang and I committed the crime one more time in the hotel.
The room was well heated, and the windows were glazed with tea-colored panes.
I sat on the sofa, and she sat in the bed. We chatted for a while, and then the criminal atmosphere began to build.
I said, Didn't you want me to see how they sag now? Let me take a look!
So she got to her feet and took off her sweater—she had on a flowery shirt underneath.
Then she sat back and said, It's still early.
After a while, the attendant brought us boiling water.
They had keys, so they just came in without even knocking on the door.
I asked, What would the attendant say if he came in right in the middle of things?
She said she had never gotten caught in the act, but she had heard that the attendant would slam the door shut and curse, Motherfuckers! Disgusting!
Before Chen Qingyang and I escaped into the mountains, I cooked pig feed for a while.
At the time I had to tend the fire, chop the pig feed (the so-called pig feed consisted of things like sweet potato vine and water hyacinth), and add chaff and water to the wok all by myself.
As I bustled around doing several things at once, the military deputy stood beside me, talking his head off. He went on nagging about how bad I was, and how bad Chen Qingyang was, even asking me to pass the message to my "stinking whore" Chen Qingyang.
All of a sudden, I flew into a fury. I grabbed a machete and slashed at a bottle gourd used for storing pumpkin seeds that hung on the beam, cutting it in half.
Frightened, the military deputy leaped out of the room.
If he had kept scolding, I would have cut his head off.
I appeared especially ferocious, because I didn't speak.
Later, in the public security office, I didn't talk much either, even when they were tying me up.
So my hands often turned dark blue.
Chen Qingyang talked all the time.
She would say something like this: Big sister, it hurts! or, Big sister, can you tuck a handkerchief under the rope?
There is a handkerchief holding my hair.
She cooperated at every point, which was why she suffered much less than I did.
We were different in every way.
Chen Qingyang said that back then I wasn't very civilized.
When we went back to the public security office, people untied us.
The rope left lines of smudge on her shirt, which was because the rope was stored in a kitchen shed and picked up ash from the bottom of woks and bits of firewood.
She tried to flick the ashes off with her stiff fingers, but could only do the front, not the back.
By the time she wanted to ask me to help her, I had already strode out of the room.
She followed out the door, but I had gone pretty far. I walked very fast, never looking back.
Because of these things, she didn't love me at all; she didn't even like me.
According to the leaders, what we did on the back slope was not considered a primary offense—except the time that she looked like a koala bear.
For example, the thing we did while cultivating the wilderness was just a secondary offense.
So I didn't finish my confession.
There was actually something more.
A hot wind blew really hard at the time and Chen Qingyang slept soundly with her arms under her head.
I unbuttoned all the buttons on her shirt so she was half naked. It looked like she had done it herself.
The sky was so blue and bright that you could even see blue light in the shadows.
All of a sudden, I felt tenderness in my heart, so I bent over her reddened body.
I'd forgotten what I did then.
When I mentioned this to Chen Qingyang, I thought she'd have forgotten.
But she said, "I remember, I remember.
I was already awake by that time.
You kissed my belly button, right?
I was just on the edge—I almost fell in love with you at that moment."
Chen Qingyang said that she had just awakened in time to see my tousled head on her belly, and then she felt a gentle touch on her navel.
For a moment she could hardly restrain herself, but she still pretended to sleep, waiting to see what else I would do.
But I didn't do anything. I raised my head and looked around. And then I walked away.
My confession says that on that night, we left the back slope and set off for the crime scene. We carried pots and pans on our backs and planned to settle down on the mountain in the south.
Over there the soil was so much richer that the grasses on both sides of the road stood as tall as people, unlike the back slope of the fifteenth team where they were about half a foot.
The moon shone that night. We even walked on the road for a while. By the time fog rose at daybreak, we had walked twelve miles and went up to the mountain in the south.
To be more specific, we arrived at the grassland to the south of Zhang Feng village and the forest wasn't far off.
We camped under a huge green tree, picking up two pieces of cow dung to start a fire, and spread a plastic sheet on the ground.
Then we took off all our clothes (the clothes were drenched by then), cuddled into each other, wrapped ourselves in three blankets, and then fell asleep.
We woke up frozen after an hour.
The three layers of blankets were all soaked, and the dung fire had died out, too.
Dewdrops fell from the trees in a downpour, and even the drops floating in the air were as big as mung beans.
This was in January, the coldest days of the dry season.
The shady side of the mountain could be that damp.
Chen Qingyang said when she woke up she heard my teeth chattering like a machine gun by her ear.
The upper teeth were clicking against the lower more than once a second.
I already had a temperature.
Once I caught a cold, it would be hard to recover unless I got a shot.
So she sat up and said, Enough. Both of us will get sick this way.
Hurry, we have to do the thing.
Not wanting to move, I said, Hold on for a bit.
The sun is coming out soon.
After a few minutes I said, Do you think I have energy to do it now?
That was the situation prior to the offense.
The offense went as follows: Chen Qingyang rode my body, up and down; behind her back was a broad expanse of white fog.
It didn't feel that cold anymore, and the sound of buffalo bells floated all around.
Since Thai people here didn't pen their buffaloes, they would ramble at daybreak.
Hung with wooden bells, the buffaloes would make clunking sounds as they walked.
A hulk suddenly turned up beside us, with dewdrops dangling from a hairy ear.
It was a white buffalo, who turned its head and stared at us with one of its eyes.
A white buffalo's horn can be used to make a knife handle, glittering and crystal clear, very pretty.
But its texture is brittle, easy to crack.
I used to have a dagger with a white-horn handle that didn't have any cracks, which was very unusual.
The blade was also made of excellent materials. Unfortunately public security confiscated it.
I asked them to return it to me after my case was cleared. They said they couldn't find it.
They didn't return my hunting gun either.
Old Guo from the public security section promised shamelessly to buy it, but he only wanted to pay fifty yuan.
In the end I got nothing back, not my gun or my knife.
Chen Qingyang and I chatted for a long time before we committed our crime in the hotel room.
Finally, she took off her shirt, but still wore her skirt and leather boots.
I went over to sit next to her and moved her hair back; some of it had turned gray.
Chen Qingyang had permed her hair.
She said she used to have excellent hair and didn't want to perm it.
Now it didn't matter anymore.
As the assistant head of the hospital, she was very busy and couldn't even find time to wash her hair every day.
Other than that, the corners of her eyes and her neck had begun to crease.
She said her daughter suggested that she have plastic surgery, but she couldn't find time to do it.
At last she said, OK, now take a look at them.
So she started to undo her bra.
I wanted to help her, but I couldn't.
The clasp was in the front, but I reached around to her back.
She said, Looks like you haven't learned what it takes to be bad. And then she turned to let me see her breasts.
I looked carefully at them for a while, and gave her my opinion.
For some reason, her face blushed a little. She said, Well, you've seen them.
What else do you want to do?
As she said this, she began to put her bra back on.
I said, What's the hurry? Leave them out.
She said, What? Still want to study my anatomy?
I said, Of course.
But let's not rush. We can talk a little longer.
The color in her face deepened. She said, Wang Er, you'll never learn how to be good. You'll always be a bastard!
When I was detained in the public security section, Luo Xiaosi came to see me. He leaned on the windowsill and found me tied up like a package.
Believing that my case was very serious and I might be shot soon, he tossed a box of cigarettes in from the window and said, Brother Er, just a little gift.
Then he burst into tears.
Luo Xiaosi was a sentimental man, easily touched.
I asked him to light a cigarette and hand it to me through the window. He did as I asked, almost dislocating his shoulder to reach me.
After that he asked me what else he could do for me. I said nothing else.
I also said, Don't bring a crowd to see me.
He promised he wouldn't.
After he was gone, a gang of boys climbed up to the window ledge to see me. Right then the cigarette smoke choked me, and with one eye open and the other closed I looked terrible.
The leader of the boys couldn't help crying out: Hooligan!
I answered back, Your father and mother are hooligans! If they're not hooligans, where did a little hooligan like you come from?
The boy grabbed some dirt and flung it at me.
After I was released, I went to see the boy's father and said: Today I was in the public security office. I was hog-tied.
Your son is young, but he has great ambition. He took the opportunity to fling dirt at me.
After hearing this, the man grabbed his son and beat the shit out of the little bastard.
I didn't leave until I witnessed the whole episode.
When Chen Qingyang heard this, she commented, Wang Er, you're a bastard!
Actually I'm not always a bastard.
Now that I have a wife and family, I have learned a lot about how to be good.
After finishing the cigarette, I drew her to me, fondled her breasts skillfully for a while, and then wanted to take off her skirt.
She said, No rush. Let's talk a little more.
Give me a cigarette too.
So I lit a cigarette, took a drag, and handed it to her.
Chen Qingyang said on Mount Zhang Feng, when she rode up and down on my body, she looked far and near, and saw nothing but gray, watery fog floating in the air.
All of a sudden, she felt very alone, very lonely.
Even though a part of me was rubbing inside her body, she still felt sad and lonely.
After a while I came back to life and said: Let's switch. Here we go. So I rolled over onto her body.
She said, That time, you were a bigger bastard than ever.
When Chen Qingyang said I was a bigger bastard than ever, she meant that I suddenly noticed her feet were cute and pretty.
I said, Old Chen, I've decided to be a foot fetishist.
Then I raised her legs and started to kiss the soles of her feet.
Chen Qingyang lay on the grass with her arms spread out and her hands grabbing the grass, and then she turned her head aside, her hair covering her face, and moaned.
In my confession I wrote: I let go of her legs and parted the hair on her face.
She struggled violently to break free, tears rolling down from her eyes, but she didn't slap me.
There were two unhealthy red spots on her cheeks.
After a while, she no longer struggled and said, You bastard! What are you going to do with me?
I said, What's wrong?
She smiled and said, Nothing.
Keep going.
So I raised her legs again.
She lay like that motionless, her arms spread out, teeth biting her lower lip without uttering a sound.
If I looked at her again, she smiled back.
I remember her face was extremely pale, and her hair was especially dark. That's how the whole thing went.
Chen Qingyang said when she lay in the cold rain that time, she felt the chill penetrate every pore.
She felt an endless flow of sorrow.
Just then a huge surge of orgasm sliced through her body.
Cold fog and icy rain both seeped into her body.
For a moment she wanted to die.
She couldn't stand it; she wanted to cry out. But at the sight of me she changed her mind.
There was no man in this world who could make her scream in front of him.
She felt disconnected from everyone.
Chen Qingyang told me later that she was deeply troubled every time I made love to her.
In the depth of her heart, she wanted to cry out, hug me, and kiss me passionately, but she couldn't bring herself to do it.
She didn't want to love other people, not even one. But still, when I kissed the soles of her feet that time, a sharp feeling still bored its way into her heart.
When Chen Qingyang and I made love on Mount Zhang Feng, an old buffalo alongside us watched.
Later it lowed and ran away, leaving the two of us alone there.
After a long while, the sky gradually lightened and the fog began to disappear from above us.
Chen Qingyang's body glistened with dew.
I let go of her and rose to my feet, to find that we were actually not far from the village. So I said, Let's go.
We left that place and never went back.
In my confession, I admitted that Chen Qingyang and I had committed crimes on numerous occasions on Grandpa Liu's back mountain.
This was because Grandpa Liu's fields had already been cultivated and didn't need much work.
So our life was relatively easy there. And since we didn't have to worry about food and shelter, we thought more about sex.
There was nobody else on that part of the mountain, and Grandpa Liu lay on his deathbed.
The mountain was either rainy or foggy. Chen Qingyang fastened my belt around her waist, with a knife dangling from it.
She wore high boots, and nothing else.
Chen Qingyang told me later that she had made only one friend in her life, and that was me.
She said all that happened came about because I talked about great friendship in my small house by the river.
A person had to accomplish a few things in life and this was one of them.
After that she didn't have deep relationships with other people.
It's no fun doing the same things over and over.
I've had a feeling about this all along.
So whenever I asked her for sex, I would say, Old pal, how about strengthening our great friendship now?
Married couples have a code of ethics to strengthen, and we don't have that, so we can only strengthen our friendship.
She said, No problem.
How do you want to strengthen it, from the front or from the back?
I said, From the back.
We were at the edge of the field then.
Because it was from the back, we had to spread two palm-bark rain capes on the ground. She knelt on her hands and knees, like a horse, and said, You'd better hurry. It's time to give Grandpa Liu a shot.
I wrote all these things in my confessions, but the leaders wanted me to confess in response to the following: 1. Who is Comrade Strain-thing Eh-thics? 2. What does "strengthening the great friendship" mean? 3. What is strengthening it from the back? And what is strengthening it from the front?
After I cleared things up, the leaders told me not to play word games. Whatever my crimes were, they said, I needed to confess them.
While we were strengthening our great friendship on the mountain, white breath puffed from our mouths.
It was not that cold, but very humid. You could grab a handful of air and wring water out of it.
Worms wriggled next to our palm-bark rain capes.
That piece of land was really rich.
Later on, before the corn fully ripened, we picked the ears and ground the kernels in a mortar. The Jingpos in the mountains prepared corn cakes that way, and they weren't bad at all.
Storing them in cold water could preserve them for a long time.
As Chen Qingyang crouched on her hands and knees in the cold rain, her breasts felt like cool apples.
Her skin all over was as smooth as a piece of burnished marble.
After a while I pulled my little Buddha out and ejaculated onto the field.
She looked back at this with a surprised and fearful expression.
I told her that it would fertilize the land.
She said, I know.
And a moment later she asked, Will a little Wang Er grow out of the land?— Does this sound like something a doctor would say?
When the rainy season passed, we dressed like Thais and went to Qingping market.
As I've already written before, I met a classmate in Qingping.
Although I was dressed like a Thai, he still recognized me on sight.
I was too tall to be a Thai.
He said, Hi, brother Er, where have you been?
I said, I'm hopeless at speaking Mandarin.
Despite the fact that I tried very hard to speak in a weird accent, it still sounded like the Beijing dialect.
That one sentence gave me away.
It was her idea to go back to the farm.
Since I myself had decided to go up the mountain, I was determined not to go back.
She'd come to the mountains for the sake of our great friendship, so I couldn't refuse to go down the mountain with her.
Actually, we could have left anytime, but she didn't want to.
She said our current life was fun.
Later Chen Qingyang said life on the mountain was also fun.
When cold mist drifted over the mountain, she would tuck a knife into her belt, put on a pair of rain boots, and enter the drizzle.
But it's no fun doing the same things over and over.
That was why she still wanted to come down the mountain, to put up with the torment of human society.
When Chen Qingyang and I relived our great friendship in the hotel room, we spoke of the time we came down the mountain and reached a junction of roads.
There were four byroads at that place, and each of them led in a single direction.
East, west, south, north didn't really matter. One led abroad, to an unknown place; one to the interior; one to the farm; and one back to where we came from, and that road also led to Husha.
In Husha there were a lot of Ahcang blacksmiths, who had passed on the skill from generation to generation.
Though I didn't come from a family of smiths, I could have been a blacksmith.
I knew those people very well; they all admired my skill.
Ahcang women were all very pretty, their bodies adorned with many bronze bracelets and necklaces and silver coins.
That kind of dress fascinated Chen Qingyang, and she wanted to go up to the mountains and become one of them.
At the time, the rainy season had just passed, and clouds rose up from every direction.
Threads of sunshine flashed in the sky.
We could have made any choice and set off in any direction.
So I stood at the crossroads for a long time.
Later when I was going back to the interior, waiting for the bus by the road, I also had two choices: I could keep waiting, or return to the farm.
When I walked along one path, I often thought about things that might happen on another path.
Then I would feel confused.
Chen Qingyang once said I was a man of average intelligence but with skillful hands, and very nutty, which all meant something.
Her saying my intelligence was only average, I didn't agree with; her saying I was nutty, I couldn't deny because it's a fact; as to my skillful hands, she probably knew that from her own body.
My hands are indeed very skillful, which wasn't just shown by how I touched women.
My palms are not big, but my fingers are unusually long and able to perform any delicate and complex task.
Those Ahcang blacksmiths on the mountain were better than me at forging blades, but for etching designs on a knife no one could match me.
So, at least twenty blacksmiths invited us to move in with them. Each suggested that he would forge the blades and I would etch the designs, and we would make a good team.
If I had moved in then, I probably would have forgotten how to speak Mandarin.
If I had moved in with an Ahcang big brother, I would be etching designs on Husha knives in that dark, deep blacksmith shop now.
In the muddy backyard of his house, there would be a brood of little children, comprised of four combinations: 1. Those produced by Chen Qingyang and me; 2. Those produced by Ahcang big brother and Ahcang big sister; 3. Those produced by Ahcang big sister and me; 4. Those produced by Chen Qingyang and Ahcang big brother.
When Chen Qingyang would come down from the mountain with firewood on her back, she would pull up her clothes, revealing her full and firm breasts, and, without making any distinction, feed one of the babies.
If I had returned to the mountains then, that would have happened.
Chen Qingyang said such things wouldn't happen because they didn't happen. What really happened was that we returned to the farm, wrote confessions, and went on denouncement trips.
Even though we could have run away at any minute, we never did.
That was what really happened.
When Chen Qingyang said I was of average intelligence, she obviously didn't consider my literary talent.
Everyone loved to read the confessions I wrote.
When I first started writing those things, I was dead set against it.
But as I wrote more, I became obsessed, clearly because the things I wrote all happened.
Things that really happen have incomparable charm.
I wrote down almost every detail in my confessions except the things that happened below: On the back mountain of the fifteenth team, after making love in our thatched hut, Chen Qingyang and I went to a creek to play in the water.
The water from the mountain had washed away the red soil, exposing the blue clay underneath.
We lay on the blue clay to sun ourselves.
After I recovered my warmth, my little Buddha stood up again.
Since he had been relieved not long before, I was not as eager as a sex maniac.
So I lay on my side behind her, pillowed on her long hair and entered her body from behind.
Later in the hotel room, we relived our great friendship in the same way.
When Chen Qingyang and I lay on our sides on the blue clay, it was getting dark and the wind had cooled a bit.
It felt very peaceful lying together, and sometimes we moved a little.
I've heard that dolphins had two ways of doing it, one for procreation and the other for entertainment, which is to say that dolphins also have the great friendship.
Chen Qingyang and I were connected, just like a pair of dolphins.
When Chen Qingyang and I lay on the blue clay with our eyes closed, we felt like a pair of dolphins swimming in the sea.
It was getting darker and the sunlight gradually reddened.
A cloud came over the horizon, pale as countless dead fish bellies turned up and countless dead fish eyes gaping.
A current of wind slipped down the mountain without a sound, without a breath, and a sadness in the air filled every space between the sky and the earth.
Chen Qingyang shed a lot of tears.
She said the scene depressed her.
I still keep the duplicates of my confessions from back then. Once, I showed them to a friend who majored in English and American literature. He said they were all very good, with the charm of Victorian underground novels.
As for the details I had cut out, he said it was a good idea to cut them out, because those details destroyed the unity of the story.
My friend is really erudite.
I was very young when I wrote the confessions and didn't have any learning (I still don't have much learning), or any idea what Victorian underground novels were.
What I had in my mind was that I shouldn't be an instigator.
Many people would read my confessions. If after reading them they couldn't help screwing damaged goods, that wasn't so bad; but if they learned the other thing, that would be really bad.
I also left out the facts that follow, for the same reason mentioned above.
We had committed many errors and deserved execution. But the leaders decided to save us, making me write confessions. How forgiving of them!
So I made up my mind that I would only write about how bad we were.
When we lived on Grandpa Liu's back slope, Chen Qingyang made a Thai skirt for herself, disguising herself as a Thai woman so she could go to Qingping on market days.
But after putting the skirt on she could barely walk.
South of Qingping, we ran into a river. The mountain water was ice-cold, and green as marinated mustard.
The water reached to my waist, and the current was very swift.
I walked over to her, hoisted her onto my shoulder, went right across the river, and then put her down.
Her waist was exactly the width of my shoulder. I remember her face turning deep red then.
I said, I could carry you to Qingping and back, faster than your swishy walking.
She said, Go take a crap.
A Thai skirt is like a cloth sheath. The hem is only about a foot around.
People who know how to wear them can do all kinds of things with them on, including peeing on the street without squatting down.
Chen Qingyang said she could never learn that trick.
After conducting an observation for a while in Qingping market, she drew the conclusion that if she wanted to disguise herself like someone, she would rather be an Ahcang woman.
On the way back, the mountain road was all uphill, and she was exhausted, too.
So whenever we needed to jump over a ditch or cross a ridge, she would find a stump, gracefully mount it, and let me carry her.
So on the way home I carried her on my shoulder climbing the hills.
The dry season had just arrived, white clouds coasted through the sky, and the sun gave brilliant light.
But in the mountains it would drizzle from time to time.
The red clay was very slippery.
Walking on slabs of red mud was like learning to skate for the first time.
So with my right hand locked around her thighs and my left hand carrying the rifle, not to mention the basket on my back, I could hardly manage the slippery incline.
All of a sudden, I slipped to the left, and was about to fall into the valley. Fortunately I had a rifle, which I used to hold me up.
I tensed my whole body and struggled to keep us from going over.
But the idiot picked that moment to give me trouble, flopping around on my back and demanding that I put her down.
We almost lost our lives that time.
As soon as I caught my breath, I switched the rifle to my right hand, raised my left hand, and slapped her bottom really hard.
Through the layer of thin cloth, it felt unusually smooth.
Her bottom was very round.
Fuck, I felt terrific.
She immediately behaved herself after getting spanked.
She became very submissive, not saying another word.
Of course, it was wrong to slap her bottom, but I thought this kind of thing might not be what other damaged goods and their lovers get into.
So the incident seemed beside the point and I didn't write about it.
When we relived our great friendship later in the hotel room, we talked about all kinds of things.
We talked about everything we could have done back then, the confessions I wrote, and even the little Buddha of mine.
As soon as the thing heard people talking about him, he became excited and began to stir.
So I concluded: back then they'd wanted to hammer us but failed.
I was still as hard as ever.
For the sake of our great friendship, I would even run three times around the block, bare assed.
A person like me never cares much about saving face.
After all, that was my golden age, even though I was considered a hooligan.
I knew a lot of people there, including the nomads in caravans, the old Jingpos living on the mountains, and so on.
When you mentioned Wang Er who knew how to fix watches, everyone knew who he was.
I could sit with them by the fire and drink the kind of wine that only costs twenty fen for half a gallon. I could drink a lot.
I was very popular there.
Other than those people, the pigs in the farm also liked me. That was because when I fed them, I used three times more bran than others did.
Because of that I fought with the mess chief. I said, at least our pigs should have enough food.
I always had a lot of friendship, and would have liked to share it with everyone.
Since they didn't want my friendship, I unloaded all of it on Chen Qingyang.
The strengthening of our great friendship that Chen Qingyang and I did while in the hotel room was of the recreational sort.
I pulled out once in the middle of it and found my little Buddha smeared with blood.
She said, An older woman's insides get a bit thin, don't push too hard.
She also said she'd stayed in the south so long that her hands cracked when she came to the north.
The quality of skin cream had declined and it was no use putting it on her hands.
After saying this, she took out a small bottle of glycerin and applied some to my little Buddha.
Then we did it from the front so we could keep talking.
I felt like a wedge for splitting wood, lying between her widely opened legs.
In the lamplight, the network of fine lines on Chen Qingyang's face looked like pieces of golden thread.
I kissed her mouth, and she didn't object—that is to say her lips were soft and parted.
She hadn't let me kiss her mouth before, only letting me kiss the line between her chin and her neck.
She said this would arouse her.
Then we continued to talk about things past.
Chen Qingyang said that was also her golden age.
Even though people called her damaged goods, she was innocent.
She was still innocent now.
After hearing this, I laughed.
But she said, what we're doing now doesn't count as a sin.
We had a great friendship, ran away, went on denouncement trips together, and now that we met again after twenty years' separation, of course she would open her legs to let me crawl in.
So even if it were considered a sin, she didn't know where the sin lay.
More importantly, she had no knowledge of this sin.
Then once again, she began to breathe heavily.
Her face turned scarlet, her legs locked me tightly, and her body beneath me tensed while again and again muffled screams came through her clenched teeth. Only after a long while did she relax.
Then she said it was not bad at all.
After the "not bad at all," she still said it was no sin.
Because she was like Socrates, ignorant of everything.
Even though she had lived more than forty years, the world before her eyes still appeared miraculous and new.
She didn't know why they dispatched her to a desolate place like Yunnan, nor did she know the reason for letting her return; she didn't know why they accused her of being damaged goods and escorted her to the stage to be denounced, nor could she figure out why they said she was not damaged goods and removed the confessions she had written from her file.
There were all kinds of explanations for these things, but she understood none of them.
She was so ignorant that she had to be innocent.
So it is written in all the law books.
Chen Qingyang said, People live in this world to suffer torment until they die.
Once you figure this out, you'll be able to bear everything calmly.
To explain how she came to this realization, we need to go all the way back to the time I returned from the hospital and left for the mountains from her place.
I asked her to come to see me and she hesitated for a long time.
When she finally decided and walked through the hot noon air to my thatched hut, many beautiful images went through her mind during those moments.
Then she entered the thatched hut and saw my little Buddha sticking up like an ugly instrument of torture.
She cried out then and abandoned all hope.
Chen Qingyang said, twenty years earlier, on a winter day, she walked into her courtyard.
She had on a cotton coat then, and climbed across the threshold clumsily.
A grain of sand suddenly got into her eye. It was so painful and the cold wind was so cutting that her tears kept rolling down.
She couldn't bear it and wept, as if she were in her little bed trying to cry herself awake.
This was an old habit born with her, deeply rooted, that we are wailing our way from one dream into another—this was the extravagant hope that we all have.
Chen Qingyang said that when she went to look for me, golden flies danced in the woods.
The wind blew from every direction, penetrating her clothes and climbing her body.
The place I lived could be called an empty mountain without a human trace.
The burning sunlight dropped from the heights like shattered bits of mica.
Beneath her thin, white smock, she had stripped off all her underwear.
At that moment her heart, too, was full of extravagant hope.
After all, it was also her golden age, even though she was called damaged goods.
Chen Qingyang said, when she went into the mountains to look for me, she climbed over a bare hill.
Wind blew in from below and caressed her sensitive parts. And the desire she felt then was as unpredictable as wind.
It dispersed just like the wild mountain wind.
She thought about our great friendship, thought about how I hurried down the mountain.
She also remembered my head of tousled hair; how directly I stared at her when I proved she was damaged goods.
She felt she needed me, and we could become one, female and male in a single body, just as when she crawled over the threshold as a child and felt the wind outside.
The sky was so blue, the sunshine so bright, and there were pigeons flying around in the sky.
The whistling of those pigeons you would remember for the rest of your life.
She wanted to talk to me at that moment, just as she longed to merge with the outside world, to dissolve into the sky and the earth.
If there were only one person—only her—in this world, she would feel too lonely.
Chen Qingyang said, when she went to my little thatched hut, she thought about everything except the little Buddha.
That thing was too ugly to appear in her musing.
Chen Qingyang wanted to wail then, but she couldn't cry out, as if someone were choking her.
This is the so-called truth.
The truth is that you can't wake up.
That was the moment she finally figured out what the world was made of; and the next moment she made up her mind: she stepped forward to accept the torment. She felt unusually happy.
Chen Qingyang also said, just then, she once again remembered the moment she cried without restraint in the doorway.
She cried and cried, but couldn't awaken from crying, and the agony was undiminished.
She cried for a long time, but she didn't want to give up hope, not until twenty years later when she faced the little Buddha.
It was not the first time that she faced the little Buddha.
But before then she didn't believe there was such a thing in the world.
Chen Qingyang said, facing this ugly thing, she remembered our great friendship.
When she was in the university, she had a female classmate who was as ugly as a devil (or to put it in these terms, she looked like my little Buddha). But the girl insisted on sharing a bed with her.
What was more, when everyone fell fast sleep, the girl would kiss her mouth and fondle her breasts.
To tell the truth, she didn't have this particular hobby, but tolerated it for the sake of their friendship.
Now, here was this thing baring its teeth and unsheathing its claws, and wanting exactly the same thing.
Then let it be satisfied, which in addition can be a way to make friends.
So she stepped forward, burying its ugliness deep inside her. She felt unusually happy.
Chen Qingyang said until then she still believed she was innocent, even after she ran away into the heart of the mountains and strengthened our great friendship almost every day.
She said this wouldn't prove she was bad at all because she didn't know why my little Buddha and I wanted to do this.
She did it for our great friendship. Great friendship is a promise.
Keeping a promise is certainly no sin.
She had promised to help me in every respect.
But I spanked her bottom in the midst of the mountains, which completely tarnished her innocence.
I wrote confessions for a long time. The leaders always said that I didn't confess thoroughly enough and needed to continue.
So I thought I would have to spend the rest of my life confessing.
Finally, Chen Qingyang wrote a confession without letting me see it and turned it into the public security office.
After that, no one asked us to write confessions or go on denouncement trips anymore.
What was more, Chen Qingyang began to distance herself from me.
I lived a listless existence for a while and went back to the interior alone.
What she wrote in the end, I hadn't a clue.
I lost everything when I came back from Yunnan: my gun, my knife, and my tools. I gained one thing: a bulging file of confessions.
From then on, wherever I went, people would know that I was a hooligan.
One benefit I got was that I returned to the city earlier than the other city students. But what was the good of returning earlier? I still had to be reeducated in the countryside near Beijing.
When I went to Yunnan, I had brought a full set of tools with me: wrench, small vise, and so on.
Besides a set of fitter's tools, I also had a set of watchmaker's tools.
I used them to fix watches while living on Grandpa Liu's back slope.
Even though the mountain was empty and lonely, some bands of horsemen passed by from time to time.
Some of them let me appraise the smuggled watches. Whatever the value I suggested, that would be the price, the watch would be worth that much.
Of course I didn't do it for free.
So I lived quite comfortably in the mountains.
If I hadn't come down, I'd be a millionaire by now.
As for that double-barreled shotgun, it was a treasure as well.
It turned out that the locals didn't value carbines and rifles much, but the double-barreled shotgun was a rarity to them.
The barrel was so heavy, plus there were two. I could really scare people off with it.
Otherwise we would have been robbed long ago.
Nobody wanted to rob me or Grandpa Liu, but they might want to take Chen Qingyang away.
As for my knife, I always fastened it on a cowhide belt, and the cowhide belt was always fastened around Chen Qingyang's waist.
She wouldn't take it off even when she was sleeping or making love to me.
She thought it was charming to carry a knife with her.
So you can say that the knife actually belonged to Chen Qingyang.
As I mentioned before, both the knife and gun were confiscated by the public security office.
I didn't bring my tools with me when I came down the mountains; I left them on the mountain in case things didn't go smoothly.
By the time I went back to Beijing, I was in a hurry and didn't have time to fetch the tools. That was how I was reduced to a complete zero.
I told Chen Qingyang that I could never figure out what she wrote in her last confession.
She said she couldn't tell me right then.
She wanted to wait until we said goodbye to each other.
She was going back to Shanghai the next day. She asked me to see her off at the train station.
Chen Qingyang was different from me in every respect.
After daybreak, she took a cold shower (the hot water had run out), and then began to dress up.
From underwear to outfit, she was a perfumed lady.
I, on the other hand, was a genuine local hooligan from underwear to outfit.
No wonder people took the confessions out of her file but left mine.
That is to say, her hymen had grown back.
As for me, I never had that thing anyway.
Besides that, I also committed the crime of instigation. We had committed many errors together and since she didn't know what her sin was, it had to be counted as mine.
We checked out and walked in the street.
Now I began to think that the last confession of hers must be extremely obscene.
Those who read our confessions were people with stone hearts and high political consciousness. If they couldn't bear reading it, it had to be pretty bad.
Chen Qingyang said, in that confession, she wrote nothing but her true sin.
Chen Qingyang said that by her true sin she meant the incident on Mount Qingping.
She was being carried on my shoulder then, wearing the Thai skirt that bound her legs tightly together, and her hair hung down to my waist.
The white cloud in the sky hurried on its journey, and there were only two of us in the midst of mountains.
I had just smacked her bottom; I spanked her really hard. The burning feeling was fading.
After that I cared about nothing else but continuing to climb the mountain.
Chen Qingyang said that moment she felt limp all over, so she let go of herself, hanging over my shoulder.
That moment she felt like a spring vine entangling a tree, or a young bird clinging to its master.
She no longer cared about anything else, and at that moment she had forgotten everything.
At that moment she fell in love with me, and that would never change.
At the train station, Chen Qingyang told me when she submitted this confession, the regimental commander read it immediately.
And after he finished reading his face was red all over, just like your little Buddha.
People who read this confession later all blushed too, like the little Buddha.
Afterward the public security people approached her several times, asking her to rewrite it. But she said, This is what really happened. Not a word should be changed.
They had no choice but to place it into her file.
Chen Qingyang said, admitting this amounts to admitting all her sins.
When she was in the public security office, they showed her all kinds of confessions, just to let her know what she couldn't write in her confession.
But she insisted on writing in this way.
She said that the reason that she wanted to write about it was because it was worse than anything else she had done.
She admitted before that she opened her legs; now she added that the reason she had done it was because she liked it.
Doing something is very different from liking it.
The former warranted going on denouncement trips; and the latter warranted being torn apart by five running horses or being minced by thousands of knives.
But no one had the power to tear us apart with five horses, so they had no choice but to set us free.
After Chen Qingyang told me this, the train roared away.
From that moment on, I never saw her again.
Along a coastal road somewhere south of the Yangtze River, a detachment of soldiers, each of them armed with a halberd, was escorting a line of seven prison carts, trudging northwards in the teeth of a bitter wind.
In each of the first three carts a single male prisoner was caged, identifiable by his dress as a member of the scholar class. One was a white-haired old man. The other two were men of middle years.
The four rear carts were occupied by women, the last of them by a young mother holding a baby girl at her breast.
The little girl was crying in a continuous wail which her mother's gentle words of comfort were powerless to console.
One of the soldiers marching alongside, irritated by the baby's crying, aimed a mighty kick at the cart. 'Stop it! Shut up!
Or I'll really give you something to cry about!'
The baby, startled by this sudden violence, cried even louder.
Under the eaves of a large house, some hundred yards from the road, a middle-aged scholar was standing with a ten- or eleven-year-old boy at his side.
He was evidently affected by this little scene, for a groan escaped his lips and he appeared to be very close to tears. 'Poor creatures!' he murmured to himself.
'Papa,' said the little boy, 'what have they done wrong?'
'What indeed!' said the man, bitterly.
'During these last two days they must have made more than thirty arrests. All our best scholars. And all of them innocents, caught up in the net,' he added in an undertone, for fear that the soldiers might hear him.
That girl's only a baby,' said the boy. 'What can she possibly be guilty of?
It's very wrong.'
'So you understand that what the Government soldiers do is wrong,' said the man. 'Good for you, my son!'
He sighed. 'They are the cleaver and we are the meat. They are the cauldron and we are the deer.'
'You explained "they are the cleaver and we are the meat" the other day, papa,' said the boy. 'It's what they say when people are massacred or beheaded.
Like meat or fish being sliced up on the chopping-board.
Does "they are the cauldron and we are the deer" mean the same thing?'
'Yes, more or less,' said the man; and since the train of soldiers and prison carts was now fast receding, he took the boy by the hand. 'Let's go indoors now,' he said. 'It's too windy for standing outside.'
Indoors the two of them went, and into his study.
The man picked up a writing-brush and moistened it on the ink-slab, then, on a sheet of paper, he wrote the character for a deer. 'The deer is a wild animal, but although it is comparatively large, it has a very peaceable nature. It eats only grass and leaves and never harms other animals.
So when other animals want to hurt it or to eat it, all it can do is run away. If it can't escape by running away, it gets eaten.'
He wrote the characters for 'chasing the deer' on the sheet of paper. 'That's why in ancient times they often used the deer as a symbol of Empire.
The common people, who are the subjects of Empire, are gentle and obedient. Like the deer's, it is their lot to be cruelly treated and oppressed.
In the History of the Han Dynasty it says "Qin lost the deer and the world went chasing after it".
That means that when the Qin Emperor lost control of the Empire, ambitious men rose up everywhere and fought each other to possess it. In the end it was the first Han Emperor who got this big, fat deer by defeating the Tyrant King of Chu.'
'I know,' said the boy.
'In my story-books it says "they chased the deer on the Central Plain". That means they were all fighting each other to become Emperor.'
The scholar nodded, pleased with his young son's astuteness. He drew a picture of a cauldron on the sheet of paper. 'In olden times they didn't use a cooking-pot on the stove to cook their food in, they used a three-legged cauldron like this and lit a fire underneath it. When they caught a deer they put it in a cauldron to seethe it.
Those ancient Emperors and great ministers were very cruel. If they didn't like somebody, they would pretend that they had committed some crime or other, and then they would put them in a cauldron and boil them.
In the Records of an Historian Lin Xiangru says to the King of Qin, "Deceiving Your Majesty was a capital offence. I beg to approach the cauldron."
What he meant was, "I deserve to die. Put me in the cauldron and boil me."'
'Often in my story-books I've seen the words "asking about the cauldrons in the Central Plain",' said the boy. 'It seems to mean the same thing as "chasing the deer in the Central Plain".'
'It does,' said the man.
'King Yu of the Xia dynasty, the first dynasty that ever was, collected metal from all the nine provinces of the Empire and used it to cast nine great cauldrons with.
"Metal" in those days meant bronze.
Each of these bronze cauldrons had the name of one of the nine provinces on it and a map showing the mountains and rivers of that province. In later times whoever became master of the Empire automatically became the guardian of these cauldrons.
In The Chronicle of Zuo it says that when the Viscount of Chu was reviewing his troops on Zhou territory and the Zhou king sent Prince Man to him with his royal compliments, the Viscount questioned Prince Man about the size and weight of the cauldrons.
Of course, as ruler of the whole Empire, only the Zhou king had the right to be guardian of the cauldrons.
For a mere Viscount like the ruler of Chu to ask questions about them showed that he was planning to seize the Empire for himself.'
'So "asking about the cauldrons" and "chasing the deer" both mean wanting to be Emperor, ' said the boy.
'And "not knowing who will kill the deer" means not knowing who is going to be Emperor.'
'That's right,' said the man.
'As time went by these expressions came to be applied to other situations as well, but originally they were only used in the sense of wanting to be Emperor.'
He sighed. 'For the common people though, the subjects of Empire, our role is to be the deer.
It may be uncertain who will kill the deer, but the deer gets killed all right. There's no uncertainty about that.'
He walked over to the window and gazed outside. The sky had now turned a leaden hue showing that snow was on its way. He sighed again, 'He must be a cruel God up there. Those hundreds of poor, innocent souls on the roads in this freezing weather.
The snow will only add to their sufferings.'
Two figures caught his eye, moving along the highway from the south. They walked close together, side by side, each of them wearing a coolie hat and a rain-cape. As they drew nearer, he recognized them with a cry of pleasure. 'It's Uncle Huang and Uncle Gu,' he said to the boy as he hurried out to greet them. 'Zongxi, Yanwu, what good wind blows you hither?' he called out to them.
The one he addressed as 'Zongxi' was a somewhat portly man with a plentiful beard covering the lower half of his face. His full name was Huang Zongxi and he, like his host, was a man of Zhejiang Province.
The other one, a tall, thin man with a swarthy complexion, was Gu Yanwu, a native of Kunshan in Jiangsu Province.
Huang Zongxi and Gu Yanwu were two of the foremost scholars of their day. Both of them, from patriotic motives, had gone into retirement when the Ming Empire collapsed, being unwilling to take office under a foreign power.
Gu Yanwu drew a little closer before replying. 'Liuliang, we have something serious to discuss with you. That's what brings us here today.'
Liuliang was the man's name, then—Lü Liuliang. His family had lived for generations in Chongde, a prefecture in the Hangzhou district of Zhejiang Province. Like Huang Zongxi and Gu Yanwu, to whom you have just been introduced, he is an historical personage, famous among those Southern gentlemen who, during the last days of the Ming dynasty and the early days of the Manchu conquest, buried themselves away on their estates and refused to take part in public life.
Lü Liuliang observed the grave expression on his visitors' faces. Knowing of old how unfailingly Gu Yanwu's political judgement was to be trusted, he realized that what the latter had referred to as 'something serious' must be very serious indeed. He clasped his hands and bowed to his guest politely. 'Come inside,' he said. 'Drink a few cups of wine first, to warm yourselves up a bit.'
As he ushered them into the study, he gave an order to the boy. 'Baozhong, tell your mother that Uncle Huang and Uncle Gu are here. Ask her to slice a couple of platefuls of that goat's meat pate to go with our wine.'
In a minute or two the boy came in again, accompanied by his younger brother. They were carrying three sets of chopsticks and wine-cups which they laid on the study table.
An old servant followed them carrying a wine-kettle and balancing some plates of cold meat.
Lü Liuliang waited until the two boys and the servant were outside the room and closed the study door. 'Come, my friends, ' he said. 'Wine first.'
Huang Zongxi declined gloomily with a brief shake of the head; but Gu Yanwu, helping himself unceremoniously from the wine-kettle, downed half a dozen of the tiny cupfuls in quick succession.
'I suppose your visit has something to do with this Ming History business,' said Lü Liuliang.
'Precisely, ' said Huang Zongxi.
Gu Yanwu raised his wine-cup and, in ringing tones, recited the following couplet:
The cool wind sways not me, howe'er it blow; For me the bright moon still shines everywhere.
'That's a splendid couplet of yours, Liuliang, ' he said.
'Whenever I drink wine now, I have to recite it—and do it justice, too,' he added, with a ceremonious flourish of his wine-cup.
In spite of Lü Liuliang's patriotic unwillingness to serve, a local official, impressed by what he had heard of Lü's reputation, had once sought to recommend him as a 'hidden talent' meriting a summons to the Manchu Court for suitable employment; but Lü had made it clear that he would die rather than accept such a tones, recited summons, and the matter had been dropped.
Some time later, however, when another high-ranking official sent forward his name as a 'distinguished scholar of exceptional merit', Lü realized that his continued refusal would be construed by the Court as an open slight, with fatal consequences for himself and perhaps his family. Accordingly he had had himself tonsured (though not in fact with any intention of becoming a real monk), whereupon the Government officials were finally convinced of his determination and ceased urging him to come out of his retirement.
Gu Yanwu's enthusiasm for Lü's somewhat pedestrian couplet sprang from the fact that it contained a hidden message. In Chinese the word for 'cool' is qing (the word chosen by the Manchus for their new 'Chinese' dynasty) and the word for 'bright' is ming (the name of the old Chinese dynasty they had supplanted). So the couplet Gu had recited could be understood to mean: The Qing wind sways not me, howe'er it blow; For me the Ming moon still shines everywhere. In other words, 'I will never bow to the Manchus, however they may threaten and cajole. For me the Empire is still the Ming Empire, whose loyal subject I remain.' Although the poem in which these lines occurred could not be published, they were familiar to all the like-minded scholars of Lü's wide acquaintance, and Huang, hearing them recited now by Gu, responded to the challenge by raising a wine-cup in homage. 'Yes, it is a very good poem,' he said, and drained it off at a gulp.
'Thank you both, but it doesn't deserve your praise,' said Lü Liuliang.
Chancing to glance upwards at that moment, Gu Yanwu found his attention caught by a large painting which was hanging on one of the walls. It must have measured near enough four feet from top to bottom and well over three yards horizontally. It was a landscape, so magnificently conceived and boldly executed that he could not forbear a cry of admiration. The sole inscription on this enormous painting was the phrase 'This Lovely Land' written in very large characters at the top. 'From the brushwork I should say this must be Erzhan's work,' he said.
'You are absolutely right,' said Lü.
This Erzhan's real name was Zha Shibiao. He was a well-known painter in the late Ming, early Manchu period and a good friend of the three men present.
'How is it that so fine a painting lacks a signature?' said Huang.
Lü sighed. The painting had a message, ' he said.
'But you know what a stolid, careful person Erzhan is. He wouldn't sign it and he wouldn't write any inscription.
He painted it for me on a sudden impulse when he was staying with me a month or so ago. Why don't you two write a few lines on it?'
Gu and Huang got up and went over to examine the painting more closely. It was a picture of the Yangtze, the Great River, rolling majestically eastwards between innumerable peaks, with a suitable garnishing of gnarled pines and strange misshapen rocks: a very beautiful landscape were it not for the all-pervading mist and cloud which seemed calculated to create an oppressive feeling of gloom in anyone looking at it.
'This lovely land under the heel of the barbarian!' said Gu Yanwu.
'And we have to swallow our humiliation and go on living in it. It makes my blood boil.
Why don't you do an inscription, Liuliang — a poem that will give voice to what Erzhan had in mind to say?'
'Very well,' said Lü Liuliang, and he took the huge scroll carefully down from the wall and spread it out on the desk, while Huang Zongxi set about grinding him some ink.
He picked up a writing-brush and for some minutes could be observed muttering to himself in the throes of composition; then, writing straight on to the painting and with pauses only for moistening the brush, he quickly completed the following poem:
Is this the same of Great Song's south retreat, This lovely land that hides its face in shame?
Or is it after Mount Yai's fateful leap? This lovely land then scarce dared breathe its name.
Now that I seem to read the painter's mind, My bitter teardrops match his drizzling rain.
Past woes I see reborn in present time: This draws the groans that no gag can restrain.
Methinks the painter used poor Gaoyu's tears To mix his colours and his brush to wet.
'This Lovely Land' was commentary enough; No need was there for other words to fret.
The blind would see, the lame would walk again, Could we but bring, back Hong Wu's glorious days.
With what wild joy we'd look down from each height And see the landscape free of mist and haze!
He threw the brush on the floor as he finished and burst into tears.
'It says all there is to say, ' said Gu Yanwu. 'Masterly!'
'It lacks subtlety, ' said Lü. 'In no way could you call it a good poem. I merely wanted to put Erzhan's original idea into writing so that anyone looking at the picture in days to come will know what it is about.'
'When China does eventually emerge from this time of darkness, ' said Huang, 'we shall indeed "see the landscape free of mist and haze". When that time comes, we shall gaze at even the poorest, meanest, most barren landscape with a feeling of joyful liberation. Then, indeed, we shall look down with "wild joy . . . from each height"!'
'Your conclusion is excellent, ' said Gu.
'When we do eventually rid our country of this foreign scum, the feeling of relief will be infinitely greater than the somewhat arid satisfaction we get from occasionally uncorking our feelings as we do now.'
Huang carefully rolled up the painting. 'You won't be able to hang this up any more now, Liuliang, ' he said. 'You'd better put it away somewhere safe.
If some evil-intentioned person like Wu Zhirong were to set eyes on it, you'd soon have the authorities round asking questions and the consequences could be serious not only for you but probably for Erzhan as well.'
That vermin Wu Zhirong!' said Gu Yanwu, smiting the desk with his hand. 'I could willingly tear his flesh with my teeth!'
'You said when you came that you had something serious to discuss with me, ' said Lü, 'yet here we are, like typical scholars, frittering our time away on poetry and painting instead of attending to business.
What was it, exactly, that brought you here?'
'It has to do with Erzhan's kinsman Yihuang, ' said Huang.
The day before yesterday Gu and I learned that he has now been named in connection with the Ming History affair.'
'Yihuang?' said Lü. 'You mean he's been dragged into it too?'
'I'm afraid so, ' said Huang.
'As soon as we heard, the two of us hurried as quickly as we could to his home in Yuanhua Town, but he wasn't there. They said he'd gone off to visit a friend.
In view of the urgency, Yanwu advised the family to make their getaway as soon as it was dark. Then, remembering that Yihuang was a good friend of yours, we thought we'd come and look for him here, '
'No, ' said Lü, 'no, he's not here.
I don't know where he can have gone.'
'If he had been here, he would have shown himself by now, ' said Gu.
'I left a poem for him on his study wall. If he goes back home, he will understand when he reads the poem that he is to go and hide. What I'm afraid of, though, is that he may not have heard the news yet and may expose himself unnecessarily outside and get himself arrested. That would be terrible, '
'Practically every scholar in West Zhejiang has fallen victim to this wretched Ming History business,' said Huang.
'The Manchu Court has obviously got it in for us. You are too well known. Gu and I both think that you ought to leave here — for the time being, at any rate. Find somewhere away from here where you can shelter from the storm, '
Lü Liuliang looked angry. 'Let the Tartar Emperor have me arrested and carried off to Peking!' he said. 'If I could curse him to his face and get rid of some of the anger that is pent up inside me, I think I should die happy, even though it meant having the flesh cut slice by slice from my bones!'
'I admire your heroic spirit,' said Gu, 'but I don't think there's much likelihood of your meeting the Tartar Emperor face to face. You would die at the hands of miserable slaves.
Besides, the Tartar Emperor is still a child who knows nothing about anything. The Government is in the hands of the all-powerful minister Oboi.
Huang and I are both of the opinion that Oboi is at the back of this Ming History affair. The reason they are making such a song and dance about it and pursuing it with such ferocity is that he sees in it a means of breaking the spirit of the Southern gentry.'
'I'm sure you are right,' said Lü.
'When the Manchu troops first came inside the Wall, they had pretty much of a free run in the whole of Northern China. It wasn't till they came south that they found themselves running into resistance everywhere. The scholars in particular, as guardians of Chinese culture, have given them endless trouble.
So Oboi is using this business to crush the Southern gentry, is he?
Humph! What does the poet say? The bush fire cannot burn them out. For next year's spring will see them sprout. —Unless, that is, he plans to wipe out the lot of us!'
'Quite,' said Huang.
'If we are to carry on the struggle against the Tartars, we need anyone who can be of use to stay alive. Indulging in heroics at this juncture might be satisfying, but would be merely falling into their trap.'
Lü suddenly understood. It was not only to look for Zha Yihuang that his friends had made their journey to him in the bitter cold. They had come because they wanted to persuade him to escape. They knew how impetuous he was and were afraid that he might throw his life away to no purpose. This was true friendship and he felt grateful for it. 'You give me such good advice, ' he said, 'I can hardly refuse to follow it.
I'll leave with the family first thing tomorrow.'
Huang and Gu were visibly delighted and chorused their approval of his decision, but Lü looked uncertain. 'But where can we go?'
The whole world belonged to the Tartars now, it seemed. Not a single patch of land was free of their hated presence. He thought of the poet Tao Yuanming's story about the fisherman who, by following a stream that flowed between flowering peach trees, had stumbled on an earthly paradise—a place where refugees from ancient tyranny had found a haven.
'Ah, Peach Tree Stream,' he murmured, 'if I could but find you!'
'Come,' said Gu, 'even if there were such a place, we cannot, as individuals, opt out altogether. In times like these—'
Before he could finish, Lü struck the desk with his hand and jumped to his feet, loudly disclaiming his own weakness, 'You do right to rebuke me, Yanwu.
The citizen of a conquered country still has his duty. It's all very well to take temporary refuge, but to live a life of ease in some Peach Tree Haven while millions are suffering under the iron heel of the Tartars would be less than human.
I spoke without thinking.'
Gu Yanwu smiled. 'I've knocked about a great deal during these last few years,' he said, 'and made friends with an extraordinary variety of people.
And wherever I've been, north or south of the River, I've discovered that it isn't only among educated people like ourselves that resistance to the Tartars is to be found. Many of our most ardent patriots are small tradesmen, Yamen runners, or market folk—people belonging to the very lowest ranks of society.
If you'd care to join us, the three of us could travel to Yangzhou together. I have a number of contacts there I could introduce you to. What do you think?'
'But that would be wonderful,' said Lü Liuliang delightedly.
'We leave for Yangzhou tomorrow, then. If the two of you will just sit here for a moment, I'll go and tell my wife to start getting things ready.'
He hurried off to the inner quarters, but was back in the study again after only a few minutes. 'About this Ming History business,' he said. 'I've heard a good deal of talk about it outside, but you can't believe everything people say; and in any case they conceal a lot of what they do know out of fear.
I'm so isolated here, I have no means of finding out the truth. Tell me, how did it all begin?'
Gu Yanwu sighed. 'We've all seen this Ming History. There are, inevitably, passages in it which are not very complimentary to the Tartars.
It was written by Zhu Guozhen, who, as you know, was a former Chancellor at the Ming Court. When he came to write about the "antics of the Paramount Chief of the Jianzhou tribe", which is how the Ming Court used to refer to the Tartars, it's a bit hard to see how he could have been polite.'
Lü nodded: 'I heard somewhere that a member of the Zhuang family of Huzhou paid one of Chancellor Zhu's heirs a thousand taels of silver for the manuscript and published it under his own name— never dreaming, of course, that it would lead to such terrible consequences.'
Gu went on to tell him the whole story.
The boots reached the door, and came on into the room.
Trinket peeped out from behind the table-cloth. From the size of his footwear, the new arrival seemed to be a boy like himself. He heaved a sigh of relief, and put the pancake in his mouth. He didn't dare to take a bite out of it, but softened it with his saliva, and then swallowed it silently down.
Meanwhile he could hear noisy munching coming from the table above him. The new boy was clearly tucking in. 'Why, he's just another scavenger like me!' thought Trinket to himself. 'I'll jump out and scare him off, then I can carry on eating to my heart's content.'
His thoughts ran on: 'What a fool I was just now! I should have stuffed a whole plateful in my pocket and buggered off!
This isn't like home. They wouldn't miss a little thing like that, or expect me to pay for it!'
All of a sudden there was a series of noisy thumps. The new scavenger had started hitting something. His curiosity aroused, Trinket poked his head out from under the table. What he saw was a boy of fourteen or fifteen, in a short gown, punching at one of the bags that hung from the beam.
After a while, the boy moved across and started attacking one of the oxhide cut-outs.
He struck the figure first on the chest with one fist, then reached forward with both hands and grappled it by the waist, forcing it to the ground. It was very much the same sort of technique as the one used by the Manchu wrestlers in the inn the previous day.
Trinket chuckled to himself and darted out from beneath the table. 'Why fight a dummy!' he cried.
'Why not try me?'
The other boy's first reaction was one of alarm, at the sight of this strange apparition with its head swathed in bandages. But alarm quickly turned to delight when he realized that he had found a sparring partner. 'Very well!' he replied. 'On guard!'
Trinket sprang forward and seized the boy's arms, intending to give him a sharp twist, but the boy turned smartly, and hooked him with his right foot, sending Trinket crashing to the floor.
'You're hopeless!' he jeered. 'You obviously don't know the first thing about wrestling!'
'Who says I don't!' protested Trinket, leaping to his feet again and reaching for the boy's left leg.
The boy made a grab for his back, but this time Trinket dodged in time and the boy seized a handful of air.
Trinket recalled Whiskers' fight with the seven wrestlers at the inn, and shot out a quick left that caught the boy hard, fair and square, on the lower cheek.
The boy stood there stunned for a few seconds, and a momentary look of anger came into his eyes.
'You're hopeless!' cried Trinket with a grin. 'You obviously don't know the first thing about wrestling.'
The boy said nothing, but feinted with his left fist. Trinket fell for it and dodged, and as he did so, the boy's elbow came crashing across into his midriff and winded him completely.
He crumpled up and fell to the ground in excruciating pain.
The boy now came at Trinket from behind, slipped both hands under his arms and laced his hands together around his throat, throttling him, and pressing him harder and harder down on to the ground.
Trinket kicked frantically with his right foot, but then the boy loosed his hands and gave him a terrific shove which sent him rolling across the room like a puppy chasing its own tail.
Trinket was furious. He came tumbling back, wrapped both arms round the boy's legs, and tugged at him with all his might. The boy crashed down right on top of him.
He was quite a bit bigger than Trinket, and had soon succeeded in throttling him again and pinning him to the ground.
Trinket began to choke, thrashed out with his feet to extricate himself, and finally managed to wriggle on top of the boy and hold him down.
He was too light to maintain the upper hand for long, however, and soon the boy was back on top of him again.
Ever a crafty fighter, Trinket now let go of the boy's legs, got behind him, and landed him a good kick on the backside.
The boy quickly grabbed his right leg and tugged at it, sending Trinket crashing down on his back.
The boy leapt astride him, pinned his head to the floor, and cried: 'Well! Surrender?'
Trinket had meanwhile managed to hook his left foot round the boy's waist, and started to rub it up and down the small of his back. The boy, it transpired, was extremely ticklish, and he couldn't help giggling, and loosened his grasp.
Trinket seized his chance, leapt up, and pinned his opponent down by the throat.
The boy now used a standard wrestling ploy, gripping Trinket by the back of the neck and pulling him to the ground with considerable force.
Trinket went out like a light. When he regained consciousness, he found that he was temporarily immobilized.
The boy burst out laughing. 'Well? Had enough? Give in?'
He eventually succeeded in jumping up and landing a head-butt right in the boy's midriff.
The boy groaned and staggered back a few steps.
Trinket lunged after him, the boy leant a little to one side, put out a leg, and brought him tumbling to the floor. Trinket reached out frantically as he fell, clutching at the boy's legs, and the two of them went down together.
They struggled for a while, each one gaining the upper hand for a moment, then going under, ringing the changes more than a dozen times, until finally they were in a complete deadlock, panting and staring fixedly at each other. And then suddenly, at exactly the same moment, they both burst out laughing. There was something about the clinch they were in that struck them both as terribly funny. Slowly they let go.
The boy reached out a hand and began removing the bandages from Trinket's face. 'What did you want to wrap your face up for?'
Trinket was about to snatch the bandages back, when he reflected that the boy had already seen most of his face and that it would achieve nothing. 'I didn't want anyone to recognize me taking the cake.'
'I see,' said the boy, chuckling and standing up. 'So you make a habit of coming here and taking food, do you?'
'No, I don't,' said Trinket.
As he rose to his feet, he stole a closer glance at his opponent: there was something at once impressive and attractive about the boy's features, a clearness of brow, a noble look in the eyes, an expression in the face, that drew Trinket towards him.
'What's your name?' asked the boy.
'Laurel,' replied Trinket. 'And yours?'
After a moment's hesitation the boy replied: 'Mine's . . . People call me Misty.
Which of the Goong-goongs do you work for?'
'I'm with Hai Goong-goong.'
Misty nodded, and used Trinket's bandages to mop the sweat from his brow. He helped himself to a cake.
Trinket was not going to be outdone. If this young fellow could continue calmly scavenging, so could he. He popped another slice of layer cake nonchalantly into his mouth.
'I can see you've never done any wrestling,' laughed Misty. 'But you're a quick mover all the same! You managed to get away that time. A few more goes and I'd have had you, though—'
'Is that right?' protested Trinket. 'Come on then: let's see—'
'At you!'
The two of them set to again.
Misty clearly knew a few wrestling moves, and was the older and stronger of the two. But Trinket had the benefit of years of experience in the streets of Yangzhou, where he'd had to deal with all manner of bullies and thugs, big and small, and in this respect he was definitely Misty's superior.
But for one reason or another (partly Whiskers' lecture, partly because this was, after all, only 'play-fighting' and not in deadly earnest) he didn't avail himself of a single one of the dubious tricks at which he excelled: the finger-twist, the pigtail-pull, the throat-bite, the eye-poke, the ear-yank, the grip-o'-the-balls.
As a result he eventually came off the loser again, with Misty sitting on his back, and no hope of throwing him off.
'Surrender?'
'Never!'
Misty burst out laughing and jumped up.
Trinket went for him again, but this time Misty shook his head. 'No more for today! Tomorrow, if you like.
But I don't see the point: you'll never be able to beat me!'
Trinket was not having this. He pulled a piece of silver from his pocket, about three taels' worth: 'Tomorrow we fight for money! You'd better bring three taels yourself!'
Misty seemed somewhat taken aback by this but then concurred. 'All right. We fight for money.
I'll bring my stake. See you here at noon tomorrow.'
'Live or die! Excellent kungfu! My word is my wand!' cried Trinket, and Misty burst out laughing. 'It certainly is!'
And with that he left the room.
Trinket helped himself to a big handful of cakes and stuffed them inside his jacket. Then he too left the room. As he went, he found himself thinking of Whiskers' heroic stand at Victory Hill: now there was a man! Whiskers had pledged his word to fight, and nothing could have stood between him and the fulfilment of that pledge, not the walls of his prison cell, not even his own wounds.
How many times Trinket had sat listening to the storytellers' tales, and how many times he'd dreamed of one day being a hero himself—Trinket the Brave Man and True! Now, he'd said he would fight, and there could be no going back! He had pledged his word!
And if he was to be a man of his word, he would have to forget about escape—at least for the time being. He would have to go back to the old eunuch that evening. He therefore decided to retrace his steps to the room where they had been gambling earlier in the day — and from there he took a direction opposite to the one he had taken earlier (which had led him deeper and deeper into the mansion), followed two covered walkways, vaguely remembered one or two shrubs he had passed by in the courtyards on the way, and somehow, by hook or by crook, navigated his way back to the old eunuch's quarters.
As he drew near the entrance, he heard the old fellow coughing. 'Goong-goong? Are you feeling any better?'
'Better my arse!' muttered the eunuch.
'Get a move on, will you!'
Trinket hurried over to him. Old Hai was sitting at a table (the broken one had been replaced).
''How much did you win?'
'I won a dozen taels,' replied Trinket. 'But I—'
'You what?' snapped the eunuch.
'I lent them to Wu.'
In actual fact he'd won twenty and lent twelve to Wu: the remaining eight he wished to hang on to.
Old Hai scowled at him. 'What do you want to go lending money to that Wu fellow for?
He doesn't even work in the Upper Library, dammit!
You could at least have lent to one of the Wen brothers!'
Trinket didn't follow this at all. 'But they didn't ask me for a loan.'
'Then you should have found a way to offer one.
Have you forgotten everything I ever told you?'
'It's just that. . . what with killing that boy yesterday, I can't seem to think straight, it must have gone clean out of my mind.
I ought to have lent the money to one of the Wen brothers, that's right, I remember now, you told me.'
Old Hai humphed. 'What's so alarming about killing?
I suppose you're only a child though, you've never done it before.
Now, about the book— I hope you haven't forgotten.'
'The book?'
Old Hai humphed again. 'Have you forgotten everything?'
'Goong-goong, I... I've got this terrible headache . . . and I'm so worried about your cough ... I just can't keep my mind on anything!'
'Very well. Come over here!'
'Yes, Goong-goong!'
Trinket walked a few steps closer.
'I'm going to repeat it for you once more. Forget this time, and I shall kill you.'
'Yes, Goong-goong!' piped Trinket, thinking to himself, 'Just say it once, and I'll never forget it, not in a hundred years!'
'Listen: you're to win money from the Wen brothers. Then you're to lend them money, the more the better.
Then, after a few days you're to ask them to take you to the Upper Library.
They'll have to say yes, if they owe you money. If they try to fob you off, you tell them that I'll report them to the Chief Librarian;
I'll tell him they refuse to pay their debts, and ask him to wait for His Majesty to—'
'His Majesty?'
'What?'
'Oh . . . nothing.'
'If they ask you why you want to go to the Upper Library, you say that you're longing for a glimpse of His Majesty, so you just want a chance to perform some little errand there.
Of course the Wen brothers won't let you see His Majesty; when they take you, His Majesty won't even be in the Upper Library. That's when you find a way to steal the book . . .'
Something was beginning to fall into place in Trinket's mind, with all these references to 'His Majesty'. 'Could this be the Palace, the Forbidden City itself!' he thought silently to himself.
'Have I been wrong all this time, about it being the number one whore-house in Peking?
Aiyeeh! Of course! That must be it!
These people are all eunuchs working for the Emperor. . .'
As a boy, Trinket had heard people talk about the Emperor, the Empress, Princes and Princesses, Palace Ladies, Palace Eunuchs, but he hadn't the faintest idea what these grand beings actually looked like. All he knew was that the Emperor wore a Dragon Robe.
In Yangzhou he'd seen all sorts of plays, but the eunuchs on stage were never dressed anything like Old Hai, or his new gambling friend Wu. And the stage eunuchs always held those long horsehair fly-whisks, and kept waving them around in the air. And anyway, he had never understood a word of what they were singing.
So this was what real Palace Eunuchs were like! 'Cripes!' he cried silently to himself. That means I've become a little Palace Eunuch myself! I've lost my balls!'
'Did you take in what I said just now?' growled Old Hai.
'Yes, Goong-goong, yes! I've got to go to His Majesty's Upper Library!'
'And why have you got to go?
To play?'
'To steal a book.'
'Which book?'
'I... I... can't remember.'
'I'll tell you once more. And this time, don't forget.
It's a Sutra, called the Sutra in Forty-Two Sections. It's very old. There are several copies of it. Just bring them all to me.
Got it?
Now—what's it called?'
'The Sutra in Forty-Two Sections.' Trinket sounded very pleased with himself.
'What are you so happy about?' snapped the old eunuch.
'I'm just happy about. . . about remembering it the minute you mentioned it again.'
In actual fact, when Old Hai had spoken of stealing a book, Trinket's heart had sunk. The 'stealing' part was no problem; it was the 'book' part that presented what seemed at first like an insurmountable obstacle.
The trouble was that Trinket could barely read. He couldn't decipher more than a word or two, let alone book titles. Then he heard the eunuch say that the book was the Sutra in Forty-Two Sections, and his heart leapt: what the word Sutra looked like he had not the foggiest notion, but numbers were something he could read. So the second part of the title was a walk-over! Wasn't that sufficient reason to be pleased?
'Now,' went on Old Hai, 'if you go stealing books from the Upper Library, you've got to be very smart, very careful. If anyone spots you, you're as good as dead. A hundred times over.'
'I know,' said Trinket. He suddenly thought of something, and added: 'If I did get caught, I'd never dream of dragging you into it, Goong-goong!'
Old Hai heaved a strangely unconcerned sigh. 'Drag me in or drag me out, it's all the same to me . . .'
He had another coughing fit, and went on: 'You've done quite well today. At least you've won something.
Were they suspicious?'
Trinket chortled. 'Oh no, why should they be?'
He was about to boast, but thought better of it.
'Well then, don't sit around doing nothing. Eat your lunch, and if you've no jobs to do, go and practise with the dice!'
'Yes, Goong-goong!' Trinket walked across to the dining-table, where bowls and chopsticks had been laid, four dishes and a soup, all untouched. 'Goong-goong, aren't you eating?
Let me serve you!'
'I'm not hungry. You go ahead.'
Trinket was delighted, and without bothering to fill his bowl with rice, he attacked a dish of stewed meat. The food was cold, but he was hungry, and to him it was indescribably delicious. 'I wonder where they get the food from?
Oh well, I'd better not ask too many questions, just keep my eyes open and pick things up one at a time.
If this really is the Forbidden City, then old Wu and the Wen brothers and little Misty must all of them be eunuchs.
I wonder what the actual Emperor and Empress look like? I must try and get a look.
Then one day when I'm back at home, ha ha! I can tell people who I've seen. Just imagine the look on their faces!
'I wonder if Whiskers got out safe?
They didn't say anything about someone getting caught when we were gambling . . . Most probably he got away all right.'
When he had finished eating, he went through the motions of practising with the dice so as not to arouse the old eunuch's suspicions, throwing them noisily across the table. After a while his eyelids began to feel heavy. He hadn't slept all night. In minutes he was sound asleep.
He slept till evening, when a junior eunuch brought in their supper.
Trinket waited on Old Hai as he ate a bowl of rice, and then helped him to bed. Afterwards he went to lie down on the smaller bed, thinking to himself: 'Tomorrow, whatever else happens, I must win my fight with Misty!'
He lay there, trying to remember Whiskers' fight with the wrestlers in the tavern. He wished he could remember the details more clearly. 'If only I'd taken old Whiskers up on his offer! With him as my teacher I could have learnt a thing or two on the way up here, and then I could have put Misty in his place—even though he is stronger than I am.
If he gets me on the ground again tomorrow, I'll die of shame! Little White Dragon—forget it! I'd never dare show my face among the Brothers!'
Suddenly a thought occurred to him. 'The wrestlers were no match for Whiskers; but Whiskers was no match for Old Turtle-head—why don't I get him to teach me a few moves?'
He asked the old eunuch at once: 'Goong-goong, if you want me to go stealing books from the Upper Library, there's just one problem.'
'What's that?'
'Well, after today's game, I met this . . . little eunuch, who stood in my way and asked me to give him some of my winnings. I wouldn't, so we ended up fighting.
That's why I was so late for lunch.'
'He beat you, presumably.'
'He was bigger than me, and stronger.
He says I've got to fight with him every day, until I can beat him. Then he'll let me off.'
'What was the little fellow's name?
Which part of the Palace was he from?'
'He's called Misty. I don't know where he's from.'
'You must have been acting too pleased with yourself after your win—that's probably what annoyed him.'
'I won't let him get away with it! I'm going to fight him tomorrow! But I just wonder if I can beat him.'
Old Hai humphed. 'You want to wangle some moves out of me, don't you?
The answer's no, so it's no use trying.'
'Clever Old Turtle-head!' thought Trinket, silently cursing to himself.
'This little fellow Misty,' he began again, out loud, 'he wasn't such a good fighter really. I wouldn't need to learn much to beat him. I don't need you to teach me, either.
I had him on the ground today, it's just that he was too strong for me: he managed to buck me off.
Tomorrow I'll get a proper grip on him. That should fix the little bugger!'
He had been trying so hard all day to keep his language clean.
'If you want to stop him bucking you, that's easy!' said Old Hai.
'I didn't think it would be hard. I just get him in a good shoulder grip, then—'
'That's no good!
Bucking comes from the lower back. You have to knee him on the vital point in the small of his back.
Come over here and I'll show you.'
Trinket hopped out of bed and was at Old Hai's bedside in a trice. The old eunuch felt around in the small of his back and pressed lightly. Trinket felt his whole body go limp.
'Can you remember that?'
'Yes, I'll try it out tomorrow. Let's hope it works.'
'Works?
Of course it will work. It's absolutely foolproof!'
Old Hai reached out his hand and pressed lightly on either side of Trinket's neck.
Trinket let out a gasp of pain. He had a choking sensation in his chest, and could hardly breathe.
'Get him on these two points,' said Hai, 'and he'll have no strength to fight with.'
Trinket was pleased as punch. 'Well, that's it then! Tomorrow, I win!'
Trinket went back to bed, and fell asleep dreaming of Misty surrendering to the Little White Dragon!
Wu came to fetch him again the following morning.
It was the Wen brothers' turn to be bankers. Trinket had soon managed to win over twenty taels off them.
It was a bad day for the bank altogether. In less than an hour they had to pay out fifty taels, which was all they had.
Trinket lent them another twenty, and by the end of the day's play that was all gone too.
All Trinket could think about was his appointment with Misty. As soon as the gambling was over, he hurried to the 'cake room'.
The table was piled high again with good things to eat, and this time Trinket tucked in with a vengeance. Then he heard the flip-ploy of cloth boots again. He ducked under the table, just in case it turned out to be someone other than Misty. 'Laurel! Laurel!' It was Misty's voice calling from the doorway.
Trinket sprang out, and with a big grin on his face, called back: 'Live or die!'
'I live, you die!' laughed Misty, striding into the room.
Trinket noticed at once that he was wearing a completely new outfit, and couldn't help feeling jealous. 'Huh!' he muttered to himself. 'Just you wait! You won't be so pleased when I've made a big rip in that smart gown of yours!'
He let out a great war cry and threw himself straight into the attack.
'Excellent kungfu!' cried his opponent, grappling him with both arms, and delivering a swinging kick with his left foot.
Trinket lost his balance, tottered and fell, bringing Misty down with him.
As Trinket rolled and spun round, he managed to pin Misty face down on the floor. He remembered Old Hai's little demonstration, and felt for the vital point in the small of Misty's back. But he had never done this sort of thing before, and it was hard to find the point at his very first attempt.
Misty meanwhile had spun round, gripped Trinket's left arm, and twisted it back.
'Hey!' screamed Trinket, 'that's not fair! Twisting my arm like that!'
That's what wresding's all about!' laughed Misty. 'Who says it's not fair!'
Trinket took advantage of the fact that Misty was busy speaking and momentarily off his guard, to launch a counter-attack. He brought his head down with all his might on to Misty's back, shot his right hand under his armpit, and flung him up into the air as hard as he could.
Misty went flying over his head and landed widi a crash on the ground.
He leapt to his feet again, crying: 'So you know the Bucking Antelope too!'
Trinket had never even heard of the Antelope. He'd just been improvising and thrashing around, and somehow or other had managed to outwit his opponent. He was pretty chuffed. 'The Antelope is nothing!' he cried. 'I know plenty more, and they're a lot worse. You haven't seen anything yet!'
'Perfect!' cried Misty in delight. 'Go to!'
Trinket engaged in a quick moment's reflection: 'Misty has obviously had lessons—that's why he keeps getting the better of me.
All I have to do is watch his moves and copy them. He can throw me a few times— I'll soon get the hang of it.'
Misty started coming at him. Trinket lunged back, but it was a feint: Misty stepped aside, let Trinket surge on, and chopped him on the back with the side of his hand.
Trinket was unable to rein himself in, and went crashing to the ground.
Misty gave a great cry of delight, leapt forwards, and planted himself astride Trinket's back. 'Surrender?'
'No! Never!' protested Trinket, but when he tried to straighten himself up and get to his feet, he felt a sudden numbness in the small of his back. Misty had beaten him to it! He had pressed on exactly the spot Old Hai had been trying to teach him the previous evening.
After struggling futilely for a moment longer, he finally gave up. 'All right!' he cried. This time I surrender!'
Misty laughed and set him free.
As Trinket got up, he suddenly shot out one of his feet. Misty toppled over, and Trinket punched him in the small of the back.
Misty gave a cry of pain and bent double. Trinket leapt on him from behind and gripped him tightly round the throat with both his hands.
Misty lost consciousness for an instant, and fell flat on the ground.
Trinket held on and demanded triumphantly: 'Surrender?'
Misty gave a little grunt. Then suddenly he drove his elbows hard into Trinket's ribs, and Trinket went reeling over on to the floor, screaming with pain, certain that he must have several broken bones.
Misty spun round and sat astride his chest, once more the victor, though this time a winded and exhausted one, panting for breath. 'Do . . . you . . . give in?'
'Give in my arse!' panted Trinket back.
The answer's no! A hundred times no!
You were lucky just now, that's all!'
'Then get up ... and fight!'
Trinket stretched and heaved with all his might (what little of it he had left), but his opponent was still astride his aching ribs, and his efforts were to no avail. After several more minutes of futile struggle, he surrendered yet again.
Misty rose to his feet. His arms were sore and limp with exhaustion.
Trinket staggered to his feet and took a few tottering steps across the room. 'Tomorrow . . . tomorrow I'll take you on again . . . and I'll beat you for sure!'
Misty laughed. 'If we fight a hundred times, you'll. . . you'll always lose! If you've got the guts, come again tomorrow!'
'You're probably the one who's not got the guts! I'm not afraid.
Live or die! My word is my wand!'
They had both been quite carried away by the fighting, and neither of them had mentioned the money, or the bet they had laid.
Or to be strictly accurate, Misty didn't mention it, and since he didn't, Trinket was more than happy to pretend to have forgotten. If he had emerged the victor, it would have been a very different story.
When Old Hai asked what he had been doing that day, Trinket told him that he had been helping supervise the confiscation of Oboi's estate. He concluded his account—which of course omitted any mention of the dagger and various other valuables that he had pocketed for himself—by telling him about the two copies of the Sutra in Forty-Two Sections that had been discovered in Oboi's house.
The old eunuch jumped up in surprise. 'Did you say there were two copies at Oboi's place?'
'Yes,' said Trinket.
'We were told to look for them by the Empress Dowager; otherwise I could have brought them to you without anyone knowing.'
Old Hai's face fell, but he soon recovered his composure. 'Hm, in the Empress Dowager's hands now, are they?' he said grimly. 'Well, it could be worse.'
Shortly after this their evening meal was brought in from the Imperial kitchens. After eating barely half a bowl of rice, the old eunuch sat back, turned up his pale, unseeing eyes towards the ceiling, and appeared to be lost in thought.
When he had finished his own meal, Trinket decided to get a little sleep in before going to his midnight assignation with the maid-in-waiting. Not wishing to disturb the old eunuch, who was still sitting motionless in his chair, he slipped over to his bed, lay down on it fully clothed, and was soon asleep.
After sleeping fitfully for what must have been several hours, he got up silently, stuffed the box of cakes inside his breast pocket,and made his way on tiptoe across the room, pausing at each step for fear the old eunuch might waken. Then, slowly and gently, he slid back the door-bar and opened one of the leaves of the door. At that very moment he heard the old eunuch's voice calling out from behind him. 'Laurie, where are you going?'
'I'm . . . I'm going out for a piss.'
'Why can't you piss in the pot?'
'I can't get to sleep,' said Trinket. 'I thought I'd walk around in the garden for a bit.'
No point in standing there talking, he thought; better get off quickly, before the Old Devil could stop him. But just as his foot crossed the threshold, he felt a tightening around the throat. 'Ow!' he hollered. The old eunuch had him by the collar and was propelling him back into the room.
'Ow!' he hollered. The old eunuch had him by the collar and was propelling him back into the room. 'Damn!' thought Trinket, 'Damn!' as the old man threw him down on the bed. 'The Old Devil knows I want to go and see that little maid and now he's going to stop me.'
'Is this to test my reactions, Goong-goong?' he said, forcing a laugh.
'It's a long time since you've taught me any kungfu. What do you call that grip?'
'Catching a Turtle in a Jar, ' said the old eunuch.
'Little turtle!'
'Turtle yourself!' thought Trinket, but didn't dare say it out loud. His eyes were darting all round him, looking for some means of escape; but the old eunuch sat himself down beside him on the bed and began addressing him in a low, almost mournful voice. 'You're bold but not careless,' he said. 'You're a sharp, intelligent lad. You haven't shown much willingness to exert yourself, but if I could have taken you in hand and knocked you into some sort of shape, you might have made quite a promising little fighter. It seems such a pity.'
'What does, Goong-goong?' Trinket asked. 'What seems a pity?'
The old eunuch ignored his question and heaved a sigh. After a pause he said: 'Your Peking accent is almost perfect now.
If your voice had sounded like this a few months ago, without a trace of the Yangzhou twang in it, I might have been taken in.'
Shock raised the fine hairs on Trinket's body. An uncontrollable shivering took possession of him and his teeth began chattering. Nevertheless he managed a nervous laugh. 'G-g-goong-goong, you're speaking very—ha ha!—s-strangely tonight.'
The old eunuch heaved another sigh. 'How old are you, child?'
He was speaking so calmly that Trinket's terror was somewhat allayed. 'About fourteen, I think.'
'If you're thirteen, you're thirteen; if you're fourteen, you're fourteen. What do you mean, you "think"?'
'My mother's not sure herself,' said Trinket. 'I can't say exactly.'
This was true. His mother had always been vague when asked about his age.
The old eunuch nodded and coughed for a bit. 'A few years ago I overtaxed my body in some way while I was training. It brought on this cough which just seems to get worse and worse. This last year I've begun to realize there's no hope for me.'
'Oh, I don't know,' said Trinket, not quite sure where this conversation was heading. 'I thought your cough was getting a bit better lately.'
'Better?' said the old eunuch shaking his head.
'It's not the least bit better.
I've got a terrible pain in my chest all the time. What would you know about it?'
'What's it like at the moment?' said Trinket.
'Would you like me to get you some of your medicine?'
Again the old man sighed. 'I've already lost my eyesight. Medicine has to be taken in the proper doses.'
Trinket almost stopped breathing. Did this mean that the Old Devil had guessed about that as well?
'You've got a lucky streak,' the old eunuch continued. 'Getting yourself into the Emperor's graces like that—it could have been very useful.
You haven't been purified, of course, but that's no problem. I could have done the cutting for you. Ah, it's a pity. Too late. Just too late.'
Trinket had no idea what 'purified' meant; but everything the old eunuch was saying tonight seemed to have something odd about it. 'Goong-goong,' he said, 'it's very late. Shouldn't you be getting some sleep?'
'Sleep?' said the old eunuch. 'Sleep?
There's plenty of sleeping to come: sleeping all day, sleeping all night, sleeping and never waking up again.
No more getting up in the morning, no more pains in the chest, no more coughing. What do you think, boy? Don't you think it would be nice?'
Trinket was too frightened to answer.
Tell me, boy,' said the old eunuch, 'who else is there besides you in your family?'
The question was straightforward enough and seemed to have been asked without sinister intent, yet Trinket did not know how to answer it.
He hadn't the faintest idea what family the late Laurie had had and feared that almost any answer he gave was likely to betray his ignorance; yet he had to say something. He settled for a modified version of the truth, hoping that Old Hai himself knew nothing about Laurie's family. 'My mother's the only one at home,' he said. 'What's happened to the rest of the family during these past few years, I'd rather not say.'
'Only a mother,' said the old eunuch.
'And what word do you use for "mother" in the Fujian dialect?'
Here was another surprise for Trinket.
'Could the real Laurie have been a Fujianese?' he wondered.
'I thought he said just now that I used to have a Yangzhou accent. Perhaps . . . perhaps he does know that I blinded him.'
Some seconds elapsed while his brain raced through a number of possibilities. His final response was a lame one. 'I... I—why do you ask?'
There was another sigh from the old eunuch. 'So young and yet so wicked! I wonder where you get it from. Who do you most resemble, your father or your mother?'
'I don't think I'm like anyone,' said Trinket.
'Anyway, I'm not all that bad. I may not be very good, but I don't think I'm wicked.'
'I haven't always been a eunuch,' the old man said after a few more coughs. 'I was already a grown man when I was purified.'
Trinket was horrified. 'So that's what being "purified" means: having your piss-pipe and the other bits cut off.
I hope he doesn't think he's going to purify me. Holy ding-a-ling dongs!'
But the old man's thoughts were on another track. 'I had a son once,' he said. 'Unfortunately he died when he was only eight years old.
If he'd lived, I might have had a grandson today of about your age.
Tell me, is that Whiskers Mao your father?'
'No. No, he's not.
Hot-piece momma, of course he's not!'
'I didn't think he was,' said the old eunuch.
'If you were my son and you were trapped here in the Palace, I would find the means of getting you out somehow, whatever the danger.'
Trinket forced a smile. 'Pity you're not my father,' he said. 'I could do with a nice, kind father like you.'
'Those two kinds of Martial Art I was teaching you, the Greater Catch-Can and the Merciful Guanyin,' said the old eunuch, '—I'd only started you on them: you couldn't be said to have more than a smattering of either.'
'You ought to teach me them properly, Goong-goong,' said Trinket.
'You're a world champion. You ought to have someone to carry on the tradition when you're gone. Teach me, so that one day I can make you famous: that's what you ought to do.'
The old man shook his head. 'I'm not a "world champion".
There are any number of kungfu Masters in the world as highly qualified as I am.
In any case, you couldn't master my two kinds of kungfu if you spent a whole lifetime studying them.'
After a moment he said: 'Put your fingers on your belly about three inches to the left of your navel and press. Hard. Tell me what you feel.'
Trinket did as he said. A pain shot through his vitals, so intense that he cried out loud. He found himself panting, and the sweat stood out on his brow.
As a matter of fact, for several weeks now he had from time to time been conscious of a slight pain in his left side which he put down to indigestion. Since it had invariably gone away after a bit, he had not paid it much attention. He had certainly never imagined that pressure on the source of this pain could produce such agony.
'Interesting, isn't it!' said the old eunuch with ill-disguised satisfaction.
Trinket cursed him inwardly: 'Hateful Old Devil! Stinking Old Turtle!'
But all he said was: 'It hurts a bit. I wouldn't have said it was interesting exactly.'
'Every morning when they deliver our food from the kitchens, you're still not back from gambling with your friends or wrestling with the Emperor, ' said the old eunuch.
'I noticed some time ago that the soup they serve is in need of seasoning, so every day I've been getting out one of the little bottles from my medicine chest and tipping a little of the powder in the soup to give it a bit of flavour.
Only a tiny bit. Too much of the poison would have too obvious an effect.
A smart lad like you doesn't miss much; but as I had been careful never to take soup myself anyway, you didn't suspect anything.'
Trinket could feel his skin crawling. 'But. . . but... I thought you didn't like soup,' he said.
'You said it made you cough.'
'I'm very fond of soup as a matter of fact,' said the old eunuch, 'but when the soup's poisoned, even if there's only a minute amount of poison in it, the effect of drinking it day after day could in the end become a little dangerous, don't you think?'
'I should say it could!' said Trinket indignantly.
'You think of everything, Goong-goong, don't you!'
'Oh, I don't know, ' said the old eunuch with a sigh.
'I'd originally been planning to let "you take the poison for about three months and then set you free so that it would have a nice long time to work on you.
To start with you'd just have about half-an-hour's pain every day, not very severe. Then, as time went by, it would get gradually worse and the periods when you felt it would get longer. After about a year you would be in pain continuously, night and day, and the pain would get so terrible that in the end you would be dashing your head against walls and tearing the flesh of your arms and legs with your teeth, '
He sighed again. 'Unfortunately my health is getting so bad that I doubt if I can wait that long.
Now then, no one else has an antidote for this poison but me, so why don't you be a good little boy and tell me who you are working for? Who was it that put you up to blinding me?
If you will give me an honest answer to that question, I promise to give you the antidote this minute. '
The question was unanswerable because there was no such person; but Trinket, though young, was not so naive as to believe that the old eunuch would spare his life even if he answered it. 'The person I'm working for?' he said. 'You'd get a nasty shock if I told you.
So you knew all along that I wasn't Laurie and you thought this trick up to make me suffer? Well—ha ha ha!— you're the one who's been tricked. Ha ha ha! You've been had good and proper.'
He kept up the artificial laughter in order to cover up the wriggling of his body. While he was talking and laughing he had managed to draw up his right leg so that he could get his hand on the dagger in his boot and draw it from its sheath. Any slight sound that this operation might have given rise to was masked by his idiotic cachinnation.
'What do you mean?' said the old eunuch. 'How have I been had?'
Trinket had to go on talking in order to keep the old man's attention distracted. Any old nonsense would do. 'I could tell there was something funny about that soup the very first day I tasted it, ' he said.
'I asked Misty about it and he told me you were trying to poison me . . .'
The old eunuch was clearly startled by this. 'The Emperor knew this?'
'Of course he did, ' said Trinket, '—though I didn't realize at the time that he was the Emperor. Misty advised me not to let on that I knew. He said pretend to drink the soup but don't swallow it; then afterwards you can spit it back in the bowl. So that's what I did. It wasn't very difficult to fool you because you couldn't see.'
All the while he was saying this, he was raising the dagger inch by inch and aiming it at the pit of the old man's stomach. He knew that in order to succeed he would have to kill him instantly. Even a correctly aimed blow, if it did not kill him at once, would cost him his own life.
The old eunuch wasn't sure whether to believe him or not. 'If you didn't drink the soup, ' he said, 'how is it that it hurt so badly when you pressed your belly?'
Trinket affected a sigh. 'I suppose it's because I didn't rinse my mouth after spitting it out. Some of the poison must still have got into my stomach.'
While he was saying this he managed to move the dagger a few inches nearer.
'Good!' said the old eunuch.
The important thing is, there's no cure; so though you've had a lighter dose, all that means is that the poison will act more slowly and you will have that much longer to suffer.'
Trinket began laughing loudly again. Under cover of his laughter he made a tremendous stab, concentrating all the strength of his body into his right arm and aiming at a place he had chosen just beneath the old man's ribs. He had worked out in advance that, after driving the dagger home, he would roll towards the corner of the bed, crawl out from under the foot of it, and make for the still open door.
But at that very moment the old eunuch sensed a slight coldness of the air caused by the proximity of the metal. Surprised but, because of a lifetime of training, never totally off his guard, he raised his left hand almost automatically to fend off an attack—though of what nature, he had no time to think—while his right hand followed with a blow of such giant force that it knocked Trinket flying through the papered lattice of the bedside window and into the garden outside. Almost at the same time the old eunuch became aware of an agonizing pain in his left hand. The dagger had severed all four of the fingers on it.
The old man calculated that the blow must have killed Trinket instantaneously and that he was probably already dead when he crashed through the window.
'Pity!' he muttered to himself, smiling grimly. The little devil didn't deserve to die so quickly.'
When he had recovered somewhat from the shock of his own gruesome accident, he went to his medicine chest and got out some wound-powder to put on the bleeding stumps; then he tore a strip off the bed-sheet to bind up his left hand with, continuing to mutter to himself as he did so. 'Where on earth could the little devil have got hold of a blade like that? I've never come across anything so sharp in my life before.'
Forcing himself to endure the excruciating pain in his hand, he jumped through the broken window into the garden, groped his way to the place where he thought Trinket must have fallen, and began feeling around for this extraordinary weapon; but though he searched for a long time, he could not find it.
Because he had come to know the garden so well while he still had his sight, he retained a clear memory of where each rock and shrub was situated.
According to his calculation, Trinket must have fallen into the bed of peonies. He could understand that the weapon might have flown from his hand and be lying at quite some distance away, but where was the body?
The blow that Trinket sustained had knocked all the air out of his lungs and caused an agonizing pain in his chest, coupled with the feeling that every bone in his body had been broken. When he hit the ground, he very nearly fainted; but somewhere at the back of his fading consciousness there was an awareness that to lie where he was would mean certain death, for the old eunuch had not been killed and would certainly come after him to finish him off. Making a supreme effort, he struggled to his feet, but after staggering no more than a couple of steps, his legs gave way and he collapsed once more onto the ground. Fortunately the place where he had fallen was the beginning of a fairly steep declivity in an open part of the garden, so instead of lying where he fell, he began rolling downwards.
If the old eunuch had not been so distracted by pain, he would probably have heard something; though so certain was he that the boy was dead, that even if he had, he would probably have attributed the sound to some other cause.
The slope was a long one and Trinket must have rolled a dozen yards or more before his body came to rest.
He struggled to his feet and began walking again in the same direction. This time, though his whole body hurt unbearably, he did not fall. Incredibly, he was still holding the dagger tightly in his hand. 'I think I must have a lucky streak,' he said to himself when he became aware of this. 'After being knocked through the window and rolling down the bank and everything, it's a miracle I didn't cut myself.'
He stopped for a moment to put the dagger back inside his boot. 'Well, the cat's really out of the bag now, ' he thought. 'If the Old Devil knows I'm not what I'm pretending to be, I can't stay in the Palace a moment longer.
Pity about that half a million taels though.
Fancy winning all that money in a single go and then losing the lot in an evening!
That's what I call real style!'
A few minutes before this he had been nearly dead, but now, after a little boasting, he was on top of the world.
'That little maid will be wondering what's become of me,' he thought. 'I can't get out of the Palace anyway in the middle of the night, so I might as well still go and see her. —Aiyo!'
Fishing it out from inside his gown, he found that the box of honey-cakes had, as he feared, been squashed completely flat. 'Better take this as evidence, in case she's feeling cross because I've kept her waiting so long, ' he thought.
'I'll tell her I had a fall. Ha! Some fall! It's turned the cakes into a cow-pat.'
'Hot-piece tamardy, this is really nice! Have you ever eaten a piece of cow-pat?
Do try some, it's delicious!'
As he started walking again, this time in the direction of the Hall of Maternal Tranquillity, the Empress Dowager's compound, he was feeling so cock-a-hoop that he was stepping out at quite a pace. The result was a most frightful pain in his chest which at once slowed him down to a shuffle.
When he reached his goal, however, he found the gate tightly closed. 'Damn!' he thought. 'I didn't think this one would be shut. Now how the devil am I going to get inside?'
Just as he was wondering what to do next, the gate suddenly opened a bit and a girl's head popped out which he recognized in the moonlight as Blossom's.
She smiled at him and beckoned to him to come in. He complied happily, and when he had slipped inside, she fastened the gate after him. 'I thought I'd better wait here in case you had trouble getting in,' she said softly in his ear. 'I've been waiting ever such a long time.'
'I know, I'm late,' Trinket whispered back, 'but I had a fall on the way. I tripped over a horrible old turtle.'
'I didn't know there were any in the Palace,' said Blossom.
'I've never seen one.
Did you hurt yourself?'
The effort of getting to this appointment had absorbed so much of his attention that it had almost taken his mind off the pain; but as soon as she asked the question he became aware that he was hurting dreadfully all over and groaned in spite of himself.
Blossom seized his hand in her own. 'Where does it hurt?' she asked in an anxious whisper.
As Trinket was on the point of answering her, a shadow appeared on the ground and he looked up to see a dark figure like a great eagle floating down from the top of the garden wall and softly alighting at the foot of it.
He was so startled that he almost called out. While he watched, the monstrous bird-shape transformed itself into a much taller, thinner shape which he could see now, in the light of the moon, was no eagle but a man—a tall, thin man with hunched shoulders and a rounded back: none other, in fact, than Old Hai the eunuch.
Blossom, who had her face towards Trinket and away from the wall, had not seen this apparition; but when Trinket fell silent and turned to stare at something with a startled look on his face, she turned to look as well.
The next moment Trinket had his hand over her mouth, holding it perhaps rather tighter than was necessary for fear she might cry out. At the same time he signalled to her with his other hand to keep quiet.
When she nodded to show that she understood, he slowly withdrew the hand from her mouth, though all the time keeping his eyes on the old eunuch.
Old Hai had now straightened himself up and was standing rather stiffly with his head cocked to one side as if listening for something. After a while he began, very slowly, to move forwards.
Trinket breathed a silent sigh of relief when he saw that he was not walking in his direction. 'Who'd have thought the Old Turtle would be able to follow me all the way here in spite of being blind?' he thought.
'Still, provided neither of us makes any noise, he isn't likely to find me.'
After taking a few steps forwards, the old eunuch made a sudden leap sideways which brought him right in front of Trinket; then, shooting out his right arm, he grasped Blossom round the neck.
She tried to scream, but because of the pressure on her throat, it was only a little smothered sound that came out.
'It's me he's after, not this girl,' thought Trinket. 'I don't think he'll kill her.'
He was only a couple of feet away from the old man and so scared that he was nearly wetting himself, but he dared not budge an inch, knowing that if he made the slightest movement he would be heard.
'Don't make any noise,' the old eunuch hissed to Blossom.
'If you don't do as I tell you, I shall strangle you.
Now tell me, but keep your voice down, who are you?'
'I. . . I. . .' Blossom began.
The old eunuch ran his hand over her head, then over her face. ''You're one of the maids-in-waiting, aren't you?' he said.
'Yes,' said Blossom in a little voice.
'So what are you doing out here in the middle of the night?'
'I'm just. . . just playing,' said Blossom.
A faint smile appeared on the face of the old eunuch which the dim moonlight transformed into a ghastly leer. 'Who is here with you?'
He cocked his head to listen.
What had enabled him to tell where Blossom was standing was the fact that she did not know how to control her breathing and had been breathing rather heavily because she was frightened.
He hadn't been aware of Trinket's presence because Trinket's breathing was more restrained.
When Trinket heard the old eunuch's question, he wanted to signal to Blossom not to let on that he was there, but dared not risk even moving his hand.
Fortunately Blossom's quick wits had already sensed that the old man was blind and she said 'no one' without needing to be told.
'Where are the Empress Dowager's rooms?' said the old eunuch.
'Take me to her!'
'Goong-goong, please, ' said Blossom pleadingly, 'please don't tell her. I... I promise never to do this again.'
She assumed that he intended to report her for being caught wandering outside at an unauthorized hour.
'No use bleating,' said the old eunuch.
Take me to her, or I'll strangle you this minute.'
He increased the pressure on her throat so that she could no longer breathe and her face became swollen and purple.
Trinket was so frightened that he lost control of his bladder and piss soaked through his trousers and began falling drip after drip on the ground. Fortunately the faint sound it made was not detected by the old eunuch; or if it was, he must have assumed that it was the little maid of honour who was wetting herself.
He released the pressure on her throat. 'Come on! Take me there!'
Blossom had no choice but to obey, but before they went, she shot a look full of tenderness at Trinket which seemed to say, 'Go, quickly! I promise I won't give you away.' 'That's the Empress Dowager's bedroom, over there,' she whispered, temporarily forgetting that the old man couldn't see.
She began walking, very slowly, in the direction she had indicated.
The old eunuch walked beside her, his right hand still encircling her throat.
'The Old Devil's going to tell the Empress Dowager about me,' thought Trinket. 'He'll tell her everything—how I killed Laurie and dressed up in his clothes, and how I made him blind, and he'll ask her to have me arrested.
But I wonder why he doesn't tell the Emperor?
I suppose it's because he knows the Emperor likes me and is afraid he might not do anything about it.
Oh help! What am I going to do?
I have to get out of this Palace as quickly as possible.
Aiyo, I can't though! The gates will have been shut long ago.
It won't be long now before the Empress Dowager gives orders for my arrest. I shan't get away then, even if I grow wings.'
Trinket accompanied Big Beaver, Brother Li, and the other leaders to the main gate. Outside they found the members of the Lodge already waiting, between two and three hundred of them, spread out in V-shaped formation on either side of the gate, all with eager, expectant looks on their faces.
After a while the same two big fellows came out carrying Whiskers between them in his hammock.
'Mao, old fellow,' said Brother Li, 'you don't need to wait out here with us. You're our guest.'
'Just hearing about the Helmsman has always been an inspiration to me,' said Whiskers. 'Now that there's a chance to actually see him, I wouldn't miss it for the world.'
Because of his extreme weakness his voice was still faint, but there was a flush of excitement on his pallid cheeks.
Presently the sound of galloping grew nearer and a party of some ten or so horsemen could be seen approaching in a little cloud of dust.
The three foremost of them jumped lightly from their horses while they were still at some distance from the gate.
Brother Li and the other leaders went forward to meet them and there was much exchange of handclasps and friendly greetings.
Trinket overheard one of the horsemen saying that the Helmsman was waiting somewhere 'ahead' and wanted Brother Li, Big Beaver, and one or two other seniors to come and see him.
After standing there some minutes in discussion, six leading members of the Lodge—Brother Li, Big Beaver, Tertius, Father Obscurus, and two others whom Trinket didn't know by name—got on to waiting horses and galloped off with the other riders.
'Isn't the Helmsman coming here then?' asked Whiskers, dreadfully disappointed.
None of those waiting had the heart to answer him, since they were all feeling equally disappointed.
'What's the matter with you all?' thought Trinket. 'Anyone would think someone had borrowed ten thousand taels off you and wouldn't pay it back, or you'd lost your wife's trousers gambling or something.
What a miserable-looking lot!'
After a good while longer, another horseman arrived and read out the names of thirteen Lodge-members who were to go for interviews with the Helmsman.
The thirteen men, with rapturous expressions on their faces, dashed to the ready-waiting horses, jumped into the saddle, and galloped away.
'Whiskers,' Trinket asked his stricken friend, 'is this Helmsman a very old man?'
'I... I've never met him,' said Whiskers.
'On River and Lake there's no one who doesn't look up to him, but I do know that to actually get to meet him is very, very difficult.'
'Tamardy!' thought Trinket. 'What a big-head! Well, you don't impress me, Mr Big Shot Helmsman.
It's all the same to me whether I see you or not.'
By this time it was beginning to look as if most members of the Lodge were definitely not going to get a glimpse of their beloved leader; nevertheless they continued to stand there outside the gate, nursing a faint hope that he might after all appear. Some of them, tired of standing, sat on the ground.
One of them urged Whiskers to go indoors and rest.
'If the Helmsman does come,' he told Whiskers, 'I promise to let you know straight away.'
But Whiskers shook his head. 'No, no, I'd rather wait here.
If the Helmsman did come and I wasn't waiting here outside, it would be very—well, disrespectful.'
He sighed wistfully. 'I wonder if it will be my luck to see him before I die.'
In his conversations with Trinket on the long journey from Yangzhou to Peking there was hardly a well-known practitioner of the Martial Arts whom Whiskers had not at one time or other disparaged. Chen Jinnan, the Helmsman, appeared to be the only expert in these matters for whom he had unqualified respect. Listening to Whiskers now, Trinket could not help absorbing a little of his enthusiasm, to the extent that he now stopped thinking of rude things to say about this paragon who seemed so conscious of his own worth.
Suddenly there was a sound of hoofbeats once more and another party of horsemen came riding up. Those Triads who had been sitting on the ground leaped to their feet and everyone craned forward, hoping that this time the summons would be for him.
There were four messengers this time. Their leader, having dismounted from his horse, clasped his hands together respectfully: 'The Helmsman requests Mr Mao and Mr Wei to favour him with their company.'
Whiskers leaped up with a joyful cry, then almost immediately sank back into the hammock with a groan. 'Let's go!' he said to his bearers. 'Hurry!'
Trinket, for his part, was extremely tickled to be called 'Mr Wei'. Even his surname—his mother's actually, since his paternity was unknown—was seldom used; but never in his life before had anyone called him 'Mr'. Well!' he thought. 'I've heard plenty of "Goong-goongs" recently; but not "Mr". Ha ha! Now I'm "Mr Trinket Wei".'
Two of the mounted men took charge of Whiskers, supporting the ends of the carrying-pole from which his hammock was suspended on their saddle-bows and riding along in parallel very slowly and carefully.
Another of them gave up his horse to Trinket and found himself another horse on which he rode along behind.
The little party of six walked their horses along the road for about a mile before taking a right-hand turn into a little side-road.
Along this, every few hundred yards, were little knots of two or three men, some sitting, some walking to and fro, all evidently lookouts, since the leading horseman, on seeing them, would make a sign, stretching out the last three fingers of his right hand and pointing with them downwards, whereupon the men would nod and silently answer him with some mysterious signal of their own.
Trinket observed that the signals they made were all different, but was unable to guess their significance.
After they had been riding along this side-road for about four miles, they came to a large farmhouse or grange.
As they arrived at the entrance, a guard on the door shouted to the people inside, 'The guests have arrived,' whereupon the door opened and out came Brother Li, Big Beaver, and two other men whom Trinket hadn't seen before. One of these last clasped his hands politely and welcomed them in: 'Mr Mao, Mr Wei, welcome! Our Society's Helmsman looks forward to meeting you.'
Trinket was thrilled. The 'Mr' seemed to be sticking.
Whiskers struggled to get up. 'I can't see the Helmsman like this. It's too . . . it's too . . .' but the effort to raise himself once more ended in a groan.
'You're a wounded man,' said Brother Li. 'You don't need to stand on ceremony.'
He ushered Trinket and Whiskers' bearers into the main reception room.
A man offered Trinket some tea and asked him to wait there a while as the Helmsman wanted to speak to Mr Mao first.
Whiskers was carried through an inner door for his interview.
While Trinket was drinking his cup of tea, a servant came in with four plates on which were various cakes and dimsum. His reaction on sampling these was unfavourable. 'These aren't a patch on the ones they do in the Palace,' he thought. They're not even as good as the ones they used to serve in the brothel.'
His estimation of the Helmsman at once went down a couple of notches.
However, he was feeling empty, and in quite a short time had made considerable inroads into the eatables on all four of the plates.
After about the time it would take to consume an average meal, Brother Li and the other three came in again, and one of the two Trinket didn't know by name, an old man with a grizzled beard, told him that the Helmsman was now ready to see him.
At some risk of choking, he swallowed the large mouthful he had been chewing, brushed off the crumbs with his hands, and followed the four men into one of the wings of the building which, together with the main reception room, enclosed a large courtyard on three sides.
There, stopping outside a doorway, the old man with the grizzled beard lifted up the door-curtain and announced them. 'Mr Trinket Wei, the Little White Dragon to see you.'
Trinket was surprised and a little flattered that they should somehow have got hold of his made-up nom de guerre. This must be Whiskers' doing, he concluded.
A man in his thirties dressed in the costume of a scholar rose to his feet as they entered, smiling a welcome.
Trinket walked in and stood for a moment darting questioning glances around him.
'This is the Helmsman,' said Big Beaver.
Trinket stole a glance at the scholar. He had a mild and gentle face, but there was a force in his flashing eyes which seemed to bore right through him and made him gasp. Almost unconsciously he sank to his knees and began to kowtow; but the scholar bent down to stop him. 'No, no, that's not necessary,' he said with a laugh.
Trinket could feel the scholar's strong hands on his arms. A warm sensation passed through his body, followed by a little tremor of excitement. He abandoned his kowtow and got up.
'By arresting and killing Oboi, the Manchu Champion,' said the scholar, speaking to the four older men but keeping his eyes on Trinket, 'our young hero here has avenged the deaths of countless numbers of our fellow-countrymen. In the course of a few days his name has become a household word.
To have won such fame, and so early in life too, is an almost unparalleled achievement.'
Although Trinket had enough cheek to shame the devil and would normally, if anyone else had praised him like this, have treated it as an excuse to show off, he found himself, in the presence of this Helmsman with his gentleness and his air of quiet authority, completely tongue-tied.
'Sit down!' The Helmsman pointed to a chair and sat down himself. Trinket followed his example but noticed that the four older men remained standing, their arms held respectfully at their sides.
'I gather that your career as a strategist began very early,' said the Helmsman, smiling. 'Mr Mao tells me that already, near Victory Hill, when you were still not far from Yangzhou, you killed a Manchu officer by means of a ruse.
I still haven't heard how you managed to arrest Oboi though.'
Lifting his head slightly, Trinket caught a glimpse of those dazzling eyes and felt his heart beating faster. All desire to indulge in his customary trumpet-blowing drained from him on the instant and he found himself for once giving a completely honest account of what he had done. He told the Helmsman how he had become Kang Xi's favourite; how Oboi had threatened and insulted the young Emperor; and how he and the Emperor had joined forces to take Oboi prisoner.
Out of a sense of loyalty to Kang Xi, he said nothing about Kang Xi stabbing Oboi in the back; but he made no attempt to conceal the fact that he had blinded Oboi with incense-ash and then hit him on the head with a bronze brazier, although he was fully aware that to a man of honour like the Helmsman this would seem, if not a third-rate, certainly a pretty second-rate way of overcoming an enemy.
The Helmsman listened to all that Trinket had to say without making a single interruption. When at last Trinket had finished, he nodded. 'I see.
Well, clearly you didn't learn your technique from Mr Mao. Who was your teacher?'
'I've had a little training,' said Trinket, 'but I didn't have a proper teacher.
What the Old Devil taught me wasn't real Martial Arts, it was just rubbish.'
'The Old Devil?' The Helmsman's vast knowledge did not encompass any practitioner with that nom de guerre.
Trinket burst out laughing. 'Old Devil is what I used to call the old eunuch Hai-goong—among other things. His real name was Hai Dafu.
He's the one who captured me and Mao Eighteen and brought us into the Palace . . .'
He suddenly realized that this flatly contradicted what he had said previously. He had told the Triad members that he and Mao Eighteen had been captured and taken into the Palace by Oboi.
To a practised liar like Trinket, however, this presented little difficulty. The old eunuch was acting on Oboi's orders. I suppose Oboi, being so important, was too grand to do the dirty work himself.'
But the Helmsman appeared to be deep in thought. 'Hai Dafu?
Hai Dafu?
Is there a eunuch with that name in the Tartar Palace?'
He turned to Trinket. 'Show me a few of the things he taught you, little brother,' he said.
However immune to self-criticism Trinket might be, he knew that what he liked to call his Martial Arts training was really a joke. 'The Old Devil only pretended to teach me,' he said.
'He hated me because I made him blind, so he did everything in his power to harm me.
The sort of things he taught me were not the sort of things you'd want anyone else to see.'
The Helmsman nodded and made a little gesture with his left hand. At once Big Beaver and the other three older men left the room, closing the door after them as they went.
'Now,' said the Helmsman, 'what did you mean when you said you made the old eunuch go blind?'
In the presence of this heroic individual Trinket found it harder to tell his habitual lies than to tell the truth—a sensation he had never experienced before. He now found himself telling the Helmsman how the massive dose of medicine he had put in the old eunuch's cup had caused him to go blind and how he had killed the little eunuch Laurie and taken his place.
The Helmsman, having heard this last piece of information with amusement and some surprise, felt with his left hand between Trinket's legs and satisfied himself that he was indeed equipped with those parts which eunuchs lack but ordinary little boys possess. Then he gave what to Trinket sounded very much like a sigh of relief. 'Good,' he said with a little smile.
'If you haven't been mutilated and you aren't a eunuch, this suggests a way out of a difficulty that has been bothering me for some time.'
He tapped the table lightly with his left hand and continued speaking, apparently to himself. 'Yes, of course. This is obviously the solution.
It gives Brother Yin a successor and the Green Wood Lodge a Master.'
Trinket didn't understand what he was talking about, but he could tell from his pleased expression that some great weight had been lifted from his mind and couldn't help feeling pleased on his behalf.
The Helmsman walked to and fro in the room, his hands clasped behind him, muttering to himself. 'Everything this Society has ever done has been unprecedented.
All innovation lies ultimately in the hands of the individual. We must be bold enough to ignore the censures of the vulgar and the loud outcries of those to whom every novelty is shocking.'
To Trinket this book-language of the Helmsman's was even more incomprehensible than what he had said before.
'Look,' said the Helmsman to Trinket, 'there are only two of us here now, so you've no need to feel embarrassed.
Never mind whether what Hai Dafu taught you was the real thing or not; just give me a demonstration of what it was.'
Trinket now realized that it was to spare him the embarrassment of making a fool of himself in front of the others that he had sent them out of the room. There seemed to be nothing for it but to comply. 'Well, it's what the Old Devil taught me,' he said, 'so it's not my fault how bad it is. If it looks really ridiculous, you must put the blame on him.'
The Helmsman gave his little smile. 'Don't worry about that; just get on with it.'
So Trinket struck up an attitude and began to go through the motions of the Merciful Guanyin repertoire—the rather limited parts of it, that is, that the old eunuch had taught him. He had already forgotten some bits of it, but could remember enough to put on some sort of performance.
The Helmsman watched him with fixed attention and nodded when he had finished. 'From what you've just been doing,' he said, 'it looks as though you may have been taught a little bit of the Shaolin School of Catch-Can. Am I right?'
The Greater Catch-Can is what Trinket had learned first, before he even started on the Merciful Guanyin method of self-defence. He knew he must be even worse at Catch-Can than at the Merciful Guanyin stuff and had been hoping to conceal his inadequacy by keeping quiet about it; but there was no concealing anything from the Helmsman, who appeared to know everything: there was nothing for it but to go on making a fool of himself. 'Yes, ' he said. 'The Old Devil taught me a bit of Catch-Can to use in my wrestling-bouts with the Emperor.'
And he proceeded to demonstrate as much as he could remember of the Greater Catch-Can.
Once again the Helmsman gave his little smile. 'Not bad!'
'I knew all along it would only make you laugh,' said Trinket.
'I wasn't laughing at you,' said the Helmsman.
'I was smiling because I was pleased to see that your memory and comprehension are so good.
That White Pony Kick you couldn't quite bring off I think Hai Dafu must have deliberately taught you incorrectly; but instead of letting it fluster you, you used your own imagination and initiative to develop it into a Carp-Fin Flick.
I thought that was very good.'
Trinket guessed that the Helmsman was a far greater Master of the Martial Arts than the Old Devil had been and the thought suddenly struck him how wonderful it would be if the Helmsman were willing to take him on as a disciple, to be his teacher, his Shifu. Then, surely, he could become a real hero, not the fake one he was at present.
He glanced shyly in the Helmsman's direction and found that cold, electric gaze directed at him.
Trinket was a shameless young blackguard and could look even the formidable Empress Dowager in the eye without blenching; but the Helmsman was somehow different. In the Helmsman's presence he had become suddenly terrified of misbehaving and as soon as their eyes met had quickly to avert his own.
'Do you know what the Triad Society is for?' the Helmsman asked him, speaking very slowly and deliberately.
'The Triad Society wants to drive out the Qing and restore the Ming,' said Trinket. 'It's for helping the Chinese and killing Tartars.'
The Helmsman nodded. 'Exactly.
Would you like to join the Triad Society and become a Brother?'
That would be terrific,' said Trinket delightedly.
In his mind every member of the Triad Society was a hero. It had not occurred to him that he might ever become one himself. But then he reflected that Whiskers wasn't a member, and it was absurd to imagine that he could be better-qualified than Whiskers; so he said, 'I'm afraid . . . I'm afraid I'm not good enough.'
His eyes, which for a moment had been shining, were now full of disappointment. It was too much to hope that the Helmsman's offer had been serious. He must have been joking.
'If you want to be a member you can,' said the Helmsman, 'only you must remember that this is a very important business we are engaged in. We have to put our country first, even before our lives.
Then again, the rules are very strict and the penalties for breaking them very heavy. You need to think carefully before you decide.'
'I don't need to think,' said Trinket. 'Whatever your rules are, I'll keep them.
If you'll let me join, Helmsman, I'll be the happiest boy in the world.'
The Helmsman's smile gave way to a more grave expression. 'This is an extremely serious business, involving matters of life and death. We're not talking about children's games.'
'I know that,' said Trinket.
'I've heard lots about the Triad Society. It fights for Honour and Justice. It does all sorts of amazing things. Of course it isn't a children's game.'
The Helmsman smiled. 'Well, as long as you know. There are thirty-six rules that everyone joining the Society must swear to follow. The rules include ten absolute prohibitions, each with a very severe punishment laid down for anyone who breaks it.'
His face became grave again. 'Some of the rules don't apply in your case yet, because you're too young; but there's one of them against dishonesty. It says, "Every Brother must be honest in all his dealings. He must not lie or cheat."
Do you think you are capable of keeping that rule?'
Trinket was slightly taken aback. 'I'd never tell you a lie, Helmsman,' he said, 'but with the other Brothers, would I have to tell them the truth—all the time?'
'Perhaps not in minor matters,' said the Helmsman, 'but in important ones, yes.'
'Well that's all right,' said Trinket.
'What about gambling? If I'm gambling with other members of the Society, am I allowed to cheat a bit?'
The Helmsman was unprepared for a question of this nature. 'Gambling is not a good thing,' he said with the faintest of smiles, 'but there is nothing in the rules which forbids it.
Of course, if you cheated them and they found out, they would probably beat you up, and there's no rule against that either: so you'd probably be well advised not to try.'
They wouldn't find out,' said Trinket, grinning. 'Actually, though, I don't need to cheat. When I gamble, nine times out of ten I win anyway.'
Since most members of the Society came from a travelling background in which gambling and drunken brawling were accepted as normal behaviour, the Helmsman was inclined to turn a blind eye on these matters. He looked at Trinket intently for some moments as if trying to make his mind up about something. 'Would you like to be my apprentice?'
What happiness! Trinket fell at once to his knees and began kowtowing. 'Shifu!'
This time the Helmsman made no effort to raise him up, but let him knock his head a dozen or more times on the floor before he stopped him. 'All right, that's enough.'
Trinket got up again, smiling delightedly.
'Now that I have become your Shifu, you had better know my real name,' said the Helmsman, 'but you are not to tell anyone. My surname is Chen. I expect you know that already. But Chen Jinnan is only the name I am known by on River and Lake.
It is not my real name. My real name is Chen Yonghua.'
'I'll remember that,' said Trinket. 'And I promise not to tell anyone.'
The Helmsman contemplated his new disciple for some moments in silence. 'Now that we are Shifu and apprentice, ' he said gravely 'we have to be completely open with each other.
I don't mind telling you that I find you both glib-tongued and sly. Your nature is a very different one from my own, and I must admit that I am not at all happy about this. In taking you on as my apprentice, it's more the interests of the Society than anything else that I have in mind.'
'From now on I'll do my best to change,' said Trinket.
'It's easier for the earth to leave its moorings than for a man to change his nature,' said the Helmsman. 'You won't be able to change very much.
On the other hand you're still young and comparatively unformed; and so far you don't seem to have done anything particularly bad.
In future you'll just have to keep reminding yourself all the time to do as I tell you.
I believe in being very strict with my apprentices, so if I find that you have been breaking the Society's rules or plotting mischief or doing anything really bad, I shall kill you without mercy. And remember: I can kill you any time, as easily as breaking an egg.'
As if to demonstrate, he tapped the table with his left hand and then seized the corner of it in his grasp. There was a crunching sound as it broke off. Then he took the broken-off piece between his palms and rubbed it until it fell in a shower of tiny slivers on the floor.
Trinket stuck his tongue out in amazement and it was some time before he could put it back in again. Yet his overriding feeling was not of amazement but of happiness that he had got this heroic strong man for his teacher. 'I promise you I won't ever do anything bad,' he said.
'I wouldn't want my Shifu to crunch my head up!
And besides, if I did do a few bad things, and you did crunch me up, with me gone, who'd there be to pass on your secrets!'
'Not "a few bad things"!' said the Helmsman. 'One! Just one bad thing, and I shall no longer consider you my apprentice.'
'What about two bad things?' said Trinket.
The Helmsman's face looked stern. 'You're being flippant.
When I say one bad thing I mean one. Do you think this is something you can haggle about?'
'No, sir,' said Trinket; but a rebellious little voice inside him was saying, 'What about half a bad thing?'
'You are my fourth apprentice,' said the Helmsman, 'and probably you will be my last.
The Triad Society keeps me so busy that I don't have much time for apprentices.
Of your three Brother-apprentices, two died fighting against the Tartars and the third was killed in Marshal Zheng's campaign to retake Taiwan. All three were brave young men who gave their lives for their country.
Apart from that I have my own reputation to keep up and I don't want you disgracing me.'
'No, sir,' said Trinket.
'But. . . but—'
'But what?' said the Helmsman.
'Sometimes things that might disgrace you seem to happen to me when I can't help it,' said Trinket.
'Like being captured by someone bigger and stronger than me and shut up in a barrel of dates and pushed around like goods to market. You mustn't blame me for things like that.'
The Helmsman found he didn't quite know whether to be angry or amused. Finally he gave a sigh. 'I'm beginning to think that taking you on as my apprentice may prove to be the biggest mistake of my life.
There's so much that hangs on this though, I just have to take the chance.
Now listen, Trinket. There's going to be some important business presently. Just keep quiet, do everything I tell you, and don't talk a lot of nonsense, and you'll be all right.
'Yes, sir,' said Trinket.
Observing that Trinket appeared to be hesitating, the Helmsman asked him if there was something else he wanted to say.
'It's only that what I say always does seem sensible to me, ' said Trinket.
'I never mean to talk nonsense. So when you tell me I'm talking nonsense, it seems unfair.'
'In that case the best thing is not to talk at all,' said the Helmsman.
But what he thought was, 'How many men of valour and reputation have I seen behaving like submissive flunkeys and hardly daring to breathe in my presence, yet this two-faced, shifty little urchin can stand here and give me all this lip!'
He got up and strode towards the door. 'Come on,' he said. 'Follow me.'
Trinket rushed to open it for him and held up the door-curtain for him to go through. Then he followed him to the hall.